Author: David Honig
Editor:
Last Update: 2 Jun 91
Subject: LSD



  CONTENTS:

  LSD (definition, introduction)
  Delysid (trade name of prescription LSD) (pharmacology)

  CAUTIONS, REAL AND IMAGINED
  ADDICTION POTENTIAL (none)
  ADULTERANTS (including the strychnine myth, manufacturing
impurities, etc.)
  BAD TRIPS (what they are, how to avoid, what to do)
  MYTHS
  DANGERS (LSD isn't for morons...)
  FLASHBACKS (what they are)
  INSOMNIA (is common, what to do)
  TOLERANCE (quickly, harmlessly aquired and lost)

  BACKGROUND

  ANTHROPOLOGY (and history)
  BOTANY (sources in nature)
  CHEMISTRY (structure)
  MECHANISM OF ACTION (uncertain)
  RELATED COMPOUNDS

  DRUG TESTING (don't worry)
  LEGAL SCHEDULING

  PRAGMATICS
  SET and SETTING (how to have a good time)
  STORAGE (keep in a cool dark dry place)
  SYNERGIES, BAD COMBINATIONS (be careful)

  REFERENCES



  LSD

  Generic name for the hallucinogen lysergic acid diethylamide-25.
Discovered by Dr. Albert Hofmann in 1938, LSD is one of the most
potent mind-altering chemicals known. A white, odorless powder
usually taken orally, its effects are highly variable and begin
within one hour and generally last 8-12 hours, gradually tapering
off.
  It has been used experimentally in the treatment of alcoholics
and psychiatric patients. It significantly alters perception, mood,
and psychological processes, and can impair motor coordination and
skills.
  During the 1950s and early 1960s, LSD experimentation was legally
conducted by psychiatrists and others in the health and mental
health professions.
  Sometimes dramatic, unpleasant psychological reactions occur,
including panic, great confusion, and anxiety. Strongly affected by
SET and SETTING. 
  Classification: hallucinogen.
  Slang names: acid, sugar. See also appendix B. (RIS 27:211-52
entries)



  Drug Slang Terms:

  Acid, Animal, Barrels, Beast, Big D, Black tabs, Blotter, Blue
acid, Blue chairs, Blue cheers, Blue mist, Blue vials, Brown dots,
California sunshine, Cap, Chief, Chocolate chips, Coffee, Contact
lens, Crackers, Cube, Cupcakes, "D", Deeda, Domes, Dot, Electric
Kool Ade, Flash, Flat blues, Ghost, Grape parfait, Green wedge,
Hawaiian sunshine, Hawk, Heavenly blue, Haze, Instant Zen, "L",
Lason sa daga, LBJ, Lucy in the sky with diamonds, Mellow yellows,
Microdots, Mighty Quinn, Mind detergent, Orange cubes, Orange
micro, Orange wedges, Owsley, Owsley's blue dot, Paper acid, Peace,
Peace tablets, Pearly gates, Pellets, Pink Owsley, Pink wedge, Pure
love, Purple barrels, Purple flats, Purple haze, Purple hearts,
Purple ozoline, Royal blues, Sacrament, Sandoz's, Smears, Squirrel,
Strawberries, Strawberry fields, Sugar, Sugar lumps, Sunshine,
Tabs, Ticket, Twenty-five, Vials Wedding bells, Wedge, White
lightning, White Owsley's, Window pane, Yellow dimples, Yellows,
Zen

     -- Research Issues 26, Guide to Drug Abuse Research
Terminology, available from NIDA or the GPO, page 54.



  From the Physician's Desk Reference:

                         Delysid (LSD 25)

               D-lysergic acid diethylamide tartrate

  Sugar-coated tablets containing 0.025 mg. (25 ug.)
  Ampoules of 1 ml. containing 0.1  mg. (100  ug.) for oral
administration.
  The solution may also be injected s.c. or i.v. The effect is
identical with that of oral administration but sets in more
rapidly.

                            PROPERTIES

  The administration of very small doses of Delysid (1/2-2 ug./kg.
body weight) results in transitory disturbances of affect,
hallucinations, depersonalization, reliving of repressed memories,
and mild neuro-vegetative symptoms. The effect sets in after 30 to
90 minutes and generally lasts 5 to 12 hours. However, intermittent
disturbances of affect may occasionally persist for several days.

                     METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION

  For oral administration the contents of 1 ampoule of Delysid are
diluted with distilled water, a 1% solution of tartaric acid or
halogen-free tap water.
   The absorption of the solution is somewhat more rapid
and more constant that that of the tablets.
     Ampoules which have not been opened, which have been protected 
against light and stored in a cool place are stable for an
unlimited period. Ampoules which have been opened or diluted
solutions retain their effectiveness for 1 to 2 days, if stored in
a refrigerator.

                      INDICATIONS AND DOSAGE

  a)  Analytical psychotherapy, to elicit release of repressed
material and provide mental relaxation, particularly in anxiety
states and obsessional neuroses. The initial dose is 25 ug. (1/4 of
an ampoule or 1 tablet). This dose is increased at each treatment
by 25 ug. until the optimum dose (usually between 500 and 200 ug.)
is found. The individual treatments are best given at intervals of
one week.
  b)  Experimental studies on the nature of psychoses: By taking
Delysid himself, the psychiatrist is able to gain an insight in the
world of ideas and sensations of mental patients. Delysid can also
be used to induced model psychoses of short duration in normal
subjects, this facilitating studies on the pathogenesis of mental
disease.
  In normal subjects, doses of 25 to 75 ug. are generally
sufficient to produce a hallucinatory psychosis (on an average 1
ug./kg. body weight). In certain forms of psychosis and in chronic
alcoholism, higher doses are necessary (2 to 4 ug./kg. body wht).

                           PRECAUTIONS

  Pathological mental conditions may be intensified by Delysid.
Particular caution is necessary in subjects with a suicidal
tendency and in those cases where a psychotic development appears
imminent. The psycho-affective lability and the tendency to commit
impulsive acts may occasionally last for some days.
  Delysid should only be administered under strict medical
supervision. The supervision should not be discontinued until the
effects of the drug have completely worn off.

                             ANTIDOTE

  The mental effects of Delysid can be rapidly reversed by the i.m.
administration of 50 mg. chlorpromazine.

                 Literature available on request.

                 SANDOZ LTD., BASLE, SWITZERLAND

  9792*-Z1540 e.-sp./d.-fr.
  Printed in Switzerland.



  From: An Introduction to Pharmacology  3rd edition, JJ Lewis,
1964 (p 385):

  Peripheral Actions

  "These include an oxytocic action and constriction of the blood
vessels of isolated vascular beds. In intact animals LSD causes a
fall in blood pressure, but its adrenergic blocking potency is
low."
  "LSD causes mydriasis in man and other species. It also causes
hyperglycaemia and mydriasis, has a hyperthermic action and causes
piloerection. These effects are sympathetic in nature and are
abolished by ganglion blocking or adrenergic blocking agents.
Parasympathetic effects include salivation, lachyrmation, vomiting,
hypotension, and brachycardia. Low doses stimulate respiration but
larger doses depress it."
  (nb: mydriasis = pupillary dilation)



  Hoffman thought the diethylamide version of the lysergic acid
molecule might be a respiratory stimulant...

  The "speedy" quality of unadulterated LSD is due to the
pharmacological actions of LSD itself, and not necessarily due to
decomposition or impurities. LSD typically causes early adrenergic
effects such as sweating, nervousness, jaw grinding and insomnia
which are easily confused with the side effects of amphetamine.



  ADDICTION POTENTIAL:

  Zero physical addiction potential. Not something that makes you
want to do it again immediately. Rarely people use it to escape in
a negative way or as part of "polydrug abuse" behavior.



  ADULTERANTS:

  Several problems are associated with street drugs: their unknown
purity and their unknown strength. Because of its extreme cheapness
and potency, the purity of LSD in blotter form is not an issue:
either its lsd or untreated paper. The purity of powders, pills,
and liquids cannot be assumed as safe. With regards to uncertain
strength, the strength of hits these days is low, 100 micrograms or
so. One should be careful and assume that the smallest square in a
tiling of a sheet is a dose, even if a printed pattern covers
several. An experienced person could judge the strength of a dose,
and if it is assumed all doses on a sheet have been processed
equivalently, those doses would be calibrated for others, much like
anything else.

  From _Psychedelic Chemistry_ by M.V.Smith,  2nd edition p 5:

  "There is a great deal of superstition regarding purification of
psychedelics. Actually, any impurities which may be present as a
result of synthetic procedures will almost certainly be without any
effect on the trip. If there are 200 micrograms oof LSD in a
tablet, there could only be 200 mics of impurities present even if
the LSD was originally only 50% pure (assuming nothing else has
been added), and few compounds will produce a significant effect
until a hundred to a thousand times this amount has been ingested. 
Even mescaline, which has a rather specific psychedelic effect,
requires about a thousand times this amount."


  Note that:  1) on a piece of paper, vs. a tablet, you can't even
add significant amounts of adulterants;  2) adulterants would cost,
whereas blank paper will rip someone off just as well.
  LSD itself has some "body-kinks" on some people some times.
Nausea is one of them. It's usually mild and transient. It also has
speedlike (ie, adrenergic stimulation) effects, etc..
  [Referring to strychnine] 15 mg has been fatal, but a more
typical fatal dose is on the order of 50mg. 1 mg of strychnine
orally probably has no observable pharmacological effects in a
typical adult. [1 mg being ten times the effective dose of LSD, by
the way.]



  BAD TRIPS:

  A person on LSD who becomes depressed, agitated, or confused may
experience these feelings in an overwhelming manner that grows on
itself. The best solution is to remove disturbing influences, get
to a safe, comforting environment, and reassure the tripper that
things are alright. It may comfort those who fear that they are
losing their minds to be reminded that it will end in several
hours.
  Authorities are fond of administering injections of anti-
psychotic drugs. Recovery in the presence of authorities, in
hospitals or police stations, is not pleasant. Sedatives or
tranquilizers such as Valium may help reduce panic and anxiety, but
the best solution is calm talking. Some claim that niacin (an over
the counter vitamin supplement) can abort a trip, but this may be
due to a placebo effect (niacin produces a flushing effect).


  MYTHS:

  LSD does not form "crystals" that reside in the body to be
"dislodged" later, causing flashbacks. LSD is a crystalline solid
(though it is unlikely that one would ever have enough to be
visible to the naked eye) but it is easily water soluable, thus
cannot form bodily deposits. Furthermore, it is metabolized and
excreted in hours. The bogus "loosened crystal" description in not
necessary to explain flashbacks, which are psychological phenomena
(see FLASHBACKS).
  LSD does not cause chromosome damage.
  Some urban legends: I've heard two "stories" about people
blinding themselves on "drugs". One was revealed as a hoax by the
person who perpetrated it (apparently it was intended to
"illustrate" the dangers of LSD), another is trotted out by anti-
drug speakers at high schools:
  1) Seven people on LSD stared at the sun and lost 90% of their
reading vision.
  2) A teenager arrested while on LSD plucked out his eyeballs in
his jail cell, and felt no pain.
  While these are bogus, the drug has powerful effects on the mind
and the consumer should be aware of the hazards, and act
appropriately.



DANGERS:

  Purely psychological hazards, not harmful to body. May release
latent psychosis or exacerbate depression. There is also a danger
of foolish behavior, e.g, misjudging distances or thinking one can
fly. Physical overdose is not a hazard, though one may easily
ingest more than one may be able to handle psychologically.
  Because the "LSD psychosis" is not distinguishable from non-drug-
induced psychosis, we have reasonable evidence to conclude that LSD
was not the sole cause of psychosis. Instead, it would seem that
the drug brought on the problems in vulnerable individuals.
Interestingly, the rate of parental alcoholism was found to be much
higher in LSD patients than in other patients or in the general
population by one study (Vardy and Kay, Arch-Gen-Psych, 1983 40(8):
877-83).
  Lethal (toxic) doses of LSD are conservatively several tens of
thousands of times as much as a normal dose, making it (in the
toxic sense) one of the safest drugs known. See section on
Pharmacology for description of side-effects.

  The LD50 for psilocybin is 275 mg/kg i.v. in mice. Of course, it
would take lots more p.o. to kill someone.
  The reported LD50 values for LSD are 46, 16.5, 0.3 mg/kg i.v. for
mice, rats, and rabbits, respectively. Again, it's hard to
accurately translate these numbers to oral values.
  Never take any drugs while pregnant.


  FLASHBACKS:

  Quoted without permission from 'Licit and Illicit Drugs,' written
by Edward M. Brecher and the editors of Consumer Reports. ISBN:
0-316-15340-0

  "A simple explanation of LSD flashbacks, and of their changed
character after 1967, is available. According to this theory,
almost everybody suffers flashbacks with or without LSD. Any
intense emotional experience--the death of a loved one, the moment
of discovery that one is in love, the moment of an automobile
smashup or of a narrow escape from a smashup--may subsequently and
unexpectedly return vividly to consciousness weeks or months later.
Since the LSD trip is often an intense emotional experience, it is
hardly surprising that it may similarly "flash back"."

 


  INSOMNIA:

  Insomnia occurs frequently after the trip. A mild, over-the-
counter sleeping aid can help, and these antihistamines do not
produce adverse interactions. Also, some people like to consume a
small amount of alcoholic beverage to "smooth the jitteries". The
usual precautions about sleeping aids after alcohol consumption
apply of course.



  TOLERANCE:

  Acquired rapidly, within 3 days. Tolerance dissipates equally
rapidly, without withdrawl, craving, or symptoms of addiction.
  Cross-tolerance can and is developed between other indole
hallucinogens, eg, DMT, LSD and Psilocybin.









  CHEMISTRY:

  Lysergic acid diethylamide _is_ lysergic acid diethylamide (or...
N,N-diethyl-D-lysergamide or...
9,10-Didehydo-N,N-diethyl-6-methylergoline-8B-carboxamide).
  Only one stereoisomer is psychoactive.
  Lysergic Acid Diethylamide is LSD rather than LAD because the
German word for acid is sauer (sp).
     LSD-25                   Lysergic acid

        O      CH2-CH3                  O
       ||     /                        ||
       ||    /                         ||
        C---N                           C---OH
        |    \                          |
        |     \                         |
        |___   CH2-CH3                  |___
       /    \                          /    \
      /      \                        /      \
    <<        N---CH3               <<        N---CH3
     \\      /                       \\      /
      \\____/                         \\____/
      /     \                         /     \
     /       \                       /       \
    <         >                     <         >
  // \       /                    // \       /
 //   \_____/                    //   \_____/
 |    ||   ||                    |    ||   ||
 |    ||   ||                    |    ||   ||
 |    ||   ||                    |    ||   ||
 \\   /\   /                     \\   /\   /
  \\ /  \ /                       \\ /  \ /
         N                               N
         H                               H

  Ergot is a product of the fungus Claviceps purpurea. The bio-
active ingredients of ergot are all derivatives of lysergic acid.
LSD is a semisynthetic derivative of lysergic acid. Thus LSD is an
"ergot"-like substance.




MECHANISM OF ACTION:

  (Note: the mechanism of action of LSD and other psychedelics is
uncertain.)

  From a chapter titled Hallucinogens and Other Psychotomimetics:
Biological Mechanisms by S.J.Watson

  "The current thesis of the effect of indole hallucinogens on
5-hydroxytrypamine might be stated as follows: LSD acts to
preferentially inhibit serotonergic cell firing and seems to spare
postsynaptic serotnergic receptors. This preference is shared by
other simillar hallucinogens but in a limited fashion. Non-
hallucinogenic analogs of LSD show no preference. These results
suggest that there are two different steric conformation of
serotonergic receptors, one of chiwh has higher affinity for LSD
than the other. In general, 5-ht is an inhibitory transmitter;
thus, when its activity is decreased, the next nuron in the chain
is freed from inhibition and becomes more active. Since serotnergic
systems appear to be intimately involved in the control of
sensation, sleep, attention, and mood, it may be possible to
explain the actions of LSD and other hallucinogens by their
disinhibition of these critical systems."
  "There is also evidence for interaction with dopaminergic
systems."

  LSD acts as a 5HT autoreceptor agonist in the raphe nucleus.
These autoreceptors are typically considered to be 5HT1As. It also
acts as a 5HT2 agonist, which is thought to be the main site of
hallucinogenic activity. It's probably best called a a mixed
5HT2/5HT1 receptor partial agonist.
  I don't know of its effects on DA. Wouldn't be surprised if it 
has 'em; the systems aren't really functionally separable. The DA
effects wouldn't be necessary for hallucinogenic activity, I'd bet.

"If there's no documentation, you can't tell bugs from features."
---C.P.



  RELATED COMPOUNDS:

  Related compounds are the indole hallucinogens including DMT
(dimethyl-tryptamine), DET (diethyl-), etc.; psilocybin; lysergic
acid. DMT is very fast acting, lasting less than an hour.
Psilocybin, found in hallucinogenic (aka magic or mexican)
mushrooms, has effects similar to LSD but they work for
approximately half the duration. These are all indole derivatives
like the neurotransmitter serotonin, 5-hydroxy-tryptamine. "Indole"
is the name of the 6-carbon ring attached to the 5-ring containing
a nitrogen. The lysergic acid molecule contains an indole structure
plus additional rings.
  LSD's two ethyl groups hanging off the amine may be replaced with
other carbon chains for compounds with different durations,
potencies, and effects.
  While LSD is semi-synthetic, DMT and psilocybin are found in
nature.
  See the sections on BOTANY and ANTHROPOLOGY for info on related
natural (plant) compounds and their uses.

  1) DMT, DET, psylocin, psylocybin, : The mushroom psylocybin
cubensis contains all four of these indole derivatives, as well as
others. DMT is dimethyltryptamine, an indole derivative which has
functionalized at the 3 position with the dimethyl ethylamine
group. It is a close relative to the amino acid, tryptophan, which
until recently was available in bulk at vitamin shops, until some
jerk poisoned himself by taking a wonga dose of it. A prep came out
in 1984 for LSD using l--tryptophan as the precursor, so this may
have facilitated the government's pullin it from the shelves. I
can't find tryptophan anywhere, now, and I've tried, bud.
  DMT, and it's brother DET (diethyltryptamine), have no oral
activity, so have to be smoked. They stink like fish oil when lit,
though. Both have hallucinogenic effects within 2-3 minutes of
toking, wand while DMT lasts for only a half hour, DET is a
smoother, more euphoric high, lasting twice as long. DET has
effects similar to psylocybin.
  Psylocybin is DMT which has a functional group, phosphoryloxy-,
at the 4 position on the indole ring. This group is immediately
converted to hydroxyl- as soon as the stuff hits your stomache to
give the cousin, psylocin. In preparing the drug, then, it is not
necessary to proceed beyond the psylocin.
  DMT and DET are easily derived from many indole derivatives, the
easiest of which is indole-3-acetic acid. I've done this reaction
and it stinks to high heaven of indole gunge, skatoles
(methylindoles), and indenes. Bad news if you want to make it at
home, because the stench is pervasive. Other derivatives, using
phenyl or butyl groups have been reported as having oral activity,
so it is not necessary to smoke the stuff. Doses run at about a
hundred mgs for smoked drug, while psylocin is orally active at
about 5 mgs.
  For a good reference work on these compounds, their preps, and
effects, see Michael Valentine Smith's "Psychedelic Chemistry,"
publisher unknown.


                             Your Friendly Neighborhood Chemical
                                           Dude,

                                          St. Theo



             DMT
                                CH
                              /   3
        // \\---  --- CH CH N
        || ||   ||      2  2  \
        \\ //\ /                CH
              N                   3
              H



DRUG TESTING:

  No risk. Its not looked for, hard to find, and transient.

  "A maximum concentration of 2-8 ng/ml [Plasma concentration of
LSD] was reached 1.0-1.25 h after an oral dose of 160 ug. ...[A]
value of 2.9 h for the elimination half-life of LSD from plasma
[was reached]."
  [Upshall, D.G., Wailling, D.G.: The determination of LSD in human
plasma following oral administration. Clinica Chimica Acta 36,
67-73 (1972)]

  Second of all, LSD and its metabolites are detectable in the
urine for much longer than one hour.
  "LSD and its metabolites were still detectable in human urine for
as long as 4 days after the ingestion of 0.2 mg of the drug."
  [Faed, E.M., McLeod, W.R.: A urine screening test of lysergide.
Journal of Chromatographic Science.  11, 4-6 (1973)]

  Note that standard, cheap initial drug screening does not use
chromatography or mass-spectrometry, and does not look for LSD.
  Spinal taps are not particularly useful (cerebro-spinal fluid
doesn't concentrate LSD or metabolites) and are never done under
any circumstances: they are painful and dangerous.

  > 1]  How long can LSD be detected in the body?

  This varies by the test being used, the detection limit placed on
the test, the point of collection and type of the sample fluid, the
amount of LSD that was taken, and the individual in question.
  Assuming the testers are using an RIA screening test with the
cutoff set at 0.1 ng/ml and assuming that the user has recently
emptied their bladder, then the detection limit for one hit (100
ug) is normally around 30 hours. Each doubling of the initial
amount will add about 5 hours. Thus taking 8 hits will leave a user
vulnerable for approximately 2 days. (NOTE: This is based on the
data in [7])

  > 2]  What exact form of test can be used to detect LSD in the
body?

  There are a number of tests which can be used to detect LSD in
the body.
  Abuscreen, a product of Roche Diagnostic Systems, is a series of
RadioImmunoAssay (RIA) tests, one of which is used to detect LSD
and its metabolites in whole blood, serum (blood), urine and
stomach contents [1]. RIA can in theory be used to detect
quantities as small as 0.020 nanograms (ng) per milliliter (ml) of
sample [2]. Laboratory tests have shown that RIA results are
accurate down to at least 0.1 ng/ml [3]. The manufacturer
recommends limiting the cutoff to 0.5 ng/ml.
  EMIT, a product of Syva Corporation, is another series of tests,
one of which can be used to detect LSD and its metabolites in serum
and urine. EMIT stands for Enzyme Multiplied Immunoassay Technique.
  Both EMIT and Abuscreen are "positive/negative" response tests
(much like pregnancy tests) which require periodic equipment
calibration and consume chemicals for each test performed. A basic
battery of tests costs approx. $15-$25 per person [4]. The basic
tests (recommended by NIDA) include marijuana, cocaine,
amphetamines, opiates, and phencyclidine (PCP). Normally, unless an
(employer) specifically requests the test, an LSD assay is not run.
  Both Roche and Syva recommend confirmation of positive results by
using a different test. The usual method of confirming positive
results is some form of chromatography. These include High
Performance Thin Layer Chromatography (HPTLC)[3], and different
forms of Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry
(GC/MS)[5][6][7][8][9].  HPTLC and GC/MS can be used to give
quantitative results as opposed to the Boolean results from EMIT or
Abuscreen.
  Laboratory tests have shown that GC/MS test for LSD in urine[6]
and blood[7] can be accurate down to 0.1 ng/ml.  The cost for
confirmation of a positive screening test is approximately $50-60.
  Positive results to either EMIT and RIA are held to be "probable
cause" by U.S. courts. GC/MS results are held to be "proof" by U.S.
courts.

  > I am asking for an actual text message containing a short,
precise description of each test.

  Immunoassays chemicals are created by injecting animals (rabbits,
sheep, donkey, etc) with the drug to be tested for and an albumin
which force the animal to produce antibodies. The antibodies are
then removed from the animal, purified and bottled. In RIA tests,
the antibodies are then added to the fluid sample with a
radioactively labeled chemical. Any of the drug (or similar
chemicals) found in a sample that is being tested will react with
this glop and by measuring the radioactivity, the amount of drugs
can be determined [2][10].

  > 3]  How can such a test be beaten?

  While there is some literature on adulterating urine samples to
produce false negative results [11], there has been little written
that applies specifically to the LSD screening tests.
  I would suggest you read the article posted by Paul Hager paying
particular attention to the warning about water intoxication [12]:
In <1991May7.141615.16477@news.cs.indiana.edu>
hagerp@iuvax.cs.indiana.edu wrote 
  + Recommended: "Dealing With Urine Tests on Short Notice"
  + by Dale Gieringer, California NORML 
  + 
  + Most folks recommend that people hydrate themselves -- the idea
  + being that by drinking water and taking a diuretic that will
  + promote water loss, the urine will be very dilute and THC
    metabolite
  + content from "tomatoe" consumption will drop below the 100
    ng/ml
  + threshold that defines a "positive".
  +
  + Mr. Gieringer recommends that, the day before the test, the
  + person drink lots of water. I would amend this to, drink your
  + normal "8 glasses" plus a few more. Don't get carried away with
  + drinking water -- there is such a thing as "water intoxication"
  + which can result in brain swelling and other nasties so don't
  + chug-a-lug a gallon of water just before the test. After
  + hydrating, and a little before the test, drink some more water
  + and use a diuretic (coffee is a weak diuretic). Urinate to
  + flush the bladder -- the first urination of the day is the
  + one most charged with metabolites. The pamphlet quotes from
  + a _High Times_ article, "How to Beat a Drug Test":
  +
  +         Take an 80 mg dose of the prescription diuretic Lasix
  +         (furosemide); take a hefty drink of water; piss two
  +         or three times; then take the test.
  +
  + Some caution is to be exercised in taking diuretics.  Consult
  + your physician.
  +
  + Mr. Gieringer also suggests that the clear, watery urine that
  + results from the above procedure is sometimes suspicious. He
  + recommends taking 50-100 mg of vitamin B2 which will color
  + urine yellow for a couple of hours. Vitamin C does not produce
  + this effect -- contrary to rumor.
  +
  + For more information, I'd suggest contacting California NORML
  + directly at (415) 563-5858. They are located in San Francisco.
  + It is also possible that Mr. Gieringer will respond directly
  + via his canorml account.

  > I am asking for ...[a description]... of each thing that LSD
leaves behind that can be detected, and of each method used to beat
each test.

  The immunsoassay tests vary in their specificity. Some display a
relatively low cross-reactivity[13], others a high cross-
reactivity[14]. The exact metabolites of LSD in humans have not
been fully determined yet, though animal studies have been done.
The only verified human metabolite I could find in the literature
was N-demethyl-LSD[6] but I did not check all the references.



FOOTNOTES:
  [1] Altunkaya, D; Smith R.N.
"Evaluation of a commercial radioimmunoassay kit for the detection
of lysergide (LSD) in serum, whole blood, urine, and stomach
contents" Forensic Science International. v47n2, September 1990,
p113-21.
  [2] Taunton-Rigby, A.; Sher, S.E.; Kelley, P.R. "Lysergic Acid
Diethylamide: Radioimmunoassay" Science. v181, July 13 1973,
p165-6.
  [3] McCarron, M.M.; Walberg, C.B.; Baselt, R.C. "Confirmation of
LSD intoxication by analysis of serum and urine." Journal of
Analytical Toxicology. v14n3, May-June 1990, p165-7.
  [4] Berg, E. "Drug-testing methods: what you should know." Safety
& Health. v142n6, Dec 1990, p52-6.
  [5] Lim, H.K.; Andrenyak, D.; Francom, P.; Bridges, R.R.; Foltz,
R.L. "Determination of LSD in urine by capillary column gas
chromatography and electon impact mass spectrometry." Journal of
Analytical Toxicology. v12n1, Jan-Feb 1988, p1-8.
  [6] Lim, H.K.; Andrenyak, D.; Francom, P. "Quantification of LSD
and N-demethyl-LSD in urine by gas chromatography/ resonance
electron capture ionization mass spectrometry." Analytical
Chemistry. v60, July 15 1988, p1420-25.
  [7] Papac, D.I.; Foltz, R.L. "Measurement of lysergic acid
dietylamide (LSD) in human plasma by gas chromatography/negative
ion chemical ionization mass spectrometry." Journal of Analytical
Toxicology. v14n3, May-June 1990, p189-90.
  [8] Paul, B.D.; Mitchell J.M.; Burbage, R.; Moy, M; Sroka, R.
"Gas chromatographic-electron-impact mass fragmentometric
determination of lysergic acid diethylamide in urine." Journal of
Chromatography. v529n1, July 13, 1990, p103-12.
  [9] Blum, L.M.; Carenzo, E.F.; Rieders, F. "Determination of
lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in urine by instrumental high-
performance thin-layer chromatography." Journal of Analytical
Toxicology. v14n5, Sep-Oct 1990, p285-7.
  [10] Ratcliffe, W.A.; Fletcher, S.M.; Moffat, A.C.; et. al.
"Radioimmunoassay of Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) in serum and
urine by using antisera of different specificities." Clinical
Chemistry. v23n2, Feb 1977, p169-74.
  [11] Cody, J.T.; Schwarzhoff, R.H. "Impact of adulterants on RIA
analysis of urine for drugs of abuse." Journal of Analytical
Toxicology. v13n5, Sep-Oct 1989, p277-84.
  [12] Klonoff, D.C. "Acute water intoxication as a complication of
urine drug testing in the workplace." Journal of the American
Medical Association. v265n1, Jan 2 1991, p84-6.
  [13] Christie J.; White, M.W.; Wiles, J.M. "A chromatographic
method for the detection of LSD in biological liquids." Journal of
Chromatography. v120n2, May 26, 1976, p496-501.
  [14] Twitchet, P.J.; Fletcher, S.M.; Sullivan, A.T.; Moffat, A.C.
"Analysis of LSD in human body fluids by high-performance liquid
chromatography, fluorescence spectroscopy and radioimmunoassay." J.
Chromatogr. v150n1, March 11 1978, p73-84.

  Sorry this was so long but I thought it deserved it :-) Enjoy a
"referenced" article.
  Tim Basher



  There were rumors going around that LSD could be detected by drug
tests for thirty days. I think this reference and abstract makes it
clear that it is probably 4 days, max. (see the end of the
abstract)

  IDNUM     03319915
  TYPE      Journal paper
  DATE      880715
  AUTHOR    Heng Keang Lim; Andrenyak, D.; Francom, P.; Foltz,
R.L.; Jones, R.T.. Center for Human Toxicology, Utah Univ., Salt
Lake City, UT, USA
  TITLE     Quantification of LSD and N-demethyl-LSD in urine by
gas chromatography/resonance electron capture ionization mass
spectrometry
  SOURCE    Analytical Chemistry; vol.60, no.14; 15 July 1988; pp.
1420-5
  SUBJECT   chromatography; electron capture; mass spectroscopic
chemical analysis; organic compounds; quantification; gas
chromatography; resonance electron capture ionisation mass
spectrometry; LSD; N-demethyl-LSD; urine; lysergic acid
diethylamide; human; in vitro; in vivo; aromatic hydroxylation;
drug; metabolite; N-tri-fluoroacetyl derivatives; calibration
curves; urinary concentrations; adult volunteer; excretion;
elimination half-lives; 4 to 6 hrs; 8 to 10 hrs Numerical data:
time 1.4E+04 to 2.2E+04 s; time 2.9E+04 to 3.6E+04 s
  Class codes: A8280M; A8280B; A3470
   CODEN     ANCHAM
   ABSTRACT  Demethylation of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) in
the human has been demonstrated, both in vitro and in vivo, and
aromatic hydroxylation at positions 13 and 14 has been tentatively
identified. A gas chromatography/resonance electron capture
ionization mass spectrometry (GC/MS) assay for LSD and
N-demethyl-LSD in urine has been developed, in which the drug and
its metabolite are converted to their N-tri-fluoroacetyl
derivatives prior to GC/MS analysis. Linear and reproducible
calibration curves have been obtained for LSD concentrations from
0.05 to 5.0 ng/mL, and for N-demethyl-LSD concentrations from 0.03
to 5.0 ng/mL. The assay was used to determine the urinary
concentrations of LSD and N-demethyl-LSD following administration
of a single oral dose of the drug (1 mu g/kg) to an adult
volunteer. The rates of excretion of LSD and N-demethyl-LSD reached
maxima in urine collected at time intervals of 4-6 and 8-10 h after
administration, respectively. The elimination half-lives for LSD
and N-demethyl-LSD were 3.6 and 10.0 h, respectively.
   MISCELLANEOUS
   Treatment: experimental
   Anal. Chem. (USA)
   Abstract number(s):  A89037987
   ISSN: 0003-2700
   Refs: 15



  LEGAL SCHEDULING:

  Class I, "no medical use" --- mostly for political reasons, as it
was and is used in psychotherapy. (Current use is in Switzerland.)



  SET and SETTING:

  "SET" is the expectations a person brings with them. "Setting" is
the environment that a person is in. Set includes expectations
about the drug's actions and how the person will react. Setting
includes the social and physical conditions. For LSD and the
hallucinogen-type drug more than other psychoactives, set and
setting are very important in determining the nature of the
experience. These factors make the difference between, e.g., the
experiences of someone taking the drug for enhancement at a
concert, for psychotherapy in an doctor's office, in a religious
context, or in the outdoors for an aesthetic experience. For best
results, one should take LSD only with people one trusts in safe,
comfortable surroundings, free of everyday intrusions. Tripping
alone is a very risky thing to do, that inexperienced people should
avoid.



  STORAGE:

  First, note that LSD is a fairly stable organic molecule, no more
or less fragile than other molecules with comparable structures.
  The main factors to be concerned with are moisture (due to
leaching and facilitated chemical reactions in the presense of
moisture), oxygen, light, and temperature. Reaction rates typically
depend upon temperature exponentially. These factors basically
apply to all organic compounds.
  Sealing in AL foil in a cool dark place is fine. Some recommend
refrigeration, but be careful about nosy guests, condensation, and
frost. Multiple, redundant seals are suggested, eg., paper in metal
foil in plastic in a metal candy tin which has been taped shut.
Should last at least a presidential term.
  Wallets are contraindicated as storage locations due to sweat.



  SYNERGIES, BAD COMBINATIONS:

  Smoking cannabis products considerably increases the effects,
increasing the visuals and also possibly increasing the cognitive
and linguistic disorders. As the effects of LSD wear off, marijuana
may bring them back, and also ease the jitteriness some dislike.
Nitrous oxide goes well with LSD, though one should be extra
careful (not to suffocate or fall down) with the nitrous because of
the effects of the LSD. MDA & cousins can go well, but people on
these drugs should not take LSD unless they are familiar with the
latter's effects.
  Alcohol's effects are largely overwhelmed by LSD, and they act in
opposite ways: alcohol being a depressant and LSD being a
(hyper)stimulant. Generally mixing stimulants and sedatives is
counterproductive.
  MAO inhibitors ???
  Amphetamines and cocaine ???



  SYNTHESIS:

  Don't try it, too difficult and risky both physically and
legally. Precursor medical drugs (ob/gyn and migraine ergot
alkaloids) are watched.






REFERENCES:

     Historical:

  Storming Heaven
  Ceremonical Chemistry
  Acid Dreams
  Drugs and the Brain
  Psychedelics Reconsidered
  Electric Koolaid Acid Test
  LSD: My Problem Child
  Leary's autobiography (_Flashbacks_)
  The Great Drug War
  Dealing With Drugs

     Use-Informational:

  Psychedelic Encyclopedia
  Psychedelic Chemistry
  Biochemical Basis of Neuro...
  Licit & Illicit Drugs
  Consumer Reports
  Recreational Drugs

     Reference:

  Merck Handbook,
  Physician's Desk Reference
  The Botany And Chemistry Of Hallucinogens

     Journal:

  Journal of psychoactive (formerly psychedelic) drugs



 AUTHOR:    Cohen, Sidney
 AUTHOR AFFILIATION:
            U California School of Medicine, Neuropsychiatric
            Inst, Los Angeles
 TITLE:     LSD: The varieties of psychotic experience.
 SOURCE:    Journal of Psychoactive Drugs  1985 Oct-Dec Vol 17(4)
              291-296
 ABSTRACT:  Discusses the contributing factors (e.g., preexisting
            character structure, insecurity, negative experience,
            current mood and stress level) and prevention and
            treatment of acute and prolonged psychotic reactions
            to LSD. (10 ref)



(some more, detailed) References:


J. Psychoactive Drugs Vol 21 (1) Jan-Mar 1989

The Addictvie Behaviors: treatment of alcoholism, drug use,
smoking, and
obesity
W.R.  Miller, Ed
(small amount of info on use of psychedelics in psychotherapy)
Pergammon press 1986


Biological Basis Of Behavior
N.Chalmers R. Crawley S.P.R.Rose Eds
Open Univ Press Harper & Row1971

Recreational Drugs
Young Klein Beyer
Collier Books, div of Macmillan pub co 1977

The Biochemical Basis Of Neuropharmacology
J.R.Cooper F.E.Bloom R.H.Roth
Oxford Univ Press 1982 (4th ed)

Craving For Ecstasy:  Consciousness And Chemistry Of Escape
H.Milkman S.Sunderwirth
Lexington Books, DC Heath and co  1987

A Primer of Drug Action
R.M.Julian
W.H.Freeman & Co.1978



LSD & Creativity
O.Janiger, M.D.de Rios
J. Psychoactive Drugs Vol 21 (1) Jan-Mar 1989

An Introduction To Pharmacology
J.J.Lewis
Williams and wilkins Co, Baltimore 1964 (3rd edition)

Metabolism Of Drugs Of Abuse
Spectrum Publications 1976
Dist by Halstead Press of John Wiley Press
L. Lemberger

Medicinal Chemistry: a series of monographs
G.deStevens Ed
Vol 4: Psychopharmaceutical agents
M. Gordon (ed)
Vol I, ch 13: psychomimetic compounds D.F.Downing
Vol II, ch 4: psychomimetic agents by A.T.Shulgin
Academic press 1976

The Road To Eleusis
Unveiling the secret of the mysteries
R.G.Wasson, A.Hoffman, C.A.P.Ruck
harcourt brace jovanovich inc. 1978

Lsd Man And Society
R.C.Debold, R.C.Leaf Eds
Wesleyan U press
Middletown Conn 1967

Hallucinogenic Plants (A Golden Guide) New York: Golden Press
1976
Shultes, R.E., Smith E.W.

The Sun And The Moon
A.Weil, MD

The Natural Mind
A.Weil, MD 1986
Houghton-mifflin pub co.

Sacred Narcotic Plants Of The New World Indians
H. Schleiffer ed.
Hafner press 1973
Div of mcmillan pub co

Moksha: Writings On Psychedlics And The Visionary Experience
A.C.huxley
stonehill pub co., NY
M.Horowitz, C. palmer Eds 1977

Psychedelic Chemistry
m.v.smith
2nd edition 1973
rip off press

Psychotropic Methoxyamphetamines: Structure And Activity In Man
S.H.Snyder, E.Richelson, H.Weingartner, LA.Faillace

Ethnopharmacological Search For Psychoactive Drugs
Proc of a symposium in sf, ca Jan 28-30 1967
D.H.Efron, B.Holmstedt, N.S.Kline eds
US Dept of HEW

The Botany And Chemistry Of Hallucinogens
R.E.Schultes, A.Hoffman
charles C Thomas Publisher
Springfield Ill 1980


The Behavioral Efffects Of Drugs
(Ch 4 hallucinogens: complications of LSD: a review of the
literature; dimensions of the LSD, methlphenidate, and
chlordiazepoxide experiences; LSD: injection early in pregnancy
produces abnormalitie in offspring of rats; LSD: no teratogenicity
in rats congentital malformation s induced bhy mescaline, LSD, and
bromolysergic acid in the hamster drug motivated-behavior: the
effect of morning glory seeds on motor activity in chicks) (also
includes Weil's study of "clinical and psychological effects of
marijuana in man")
D.W. Matheson M.A. Davidson Holt Rinehart
Winston Inc 1972


any textbook titled "Physiological Psychology"

..............................

(about  visual disturbances: )
Migraine: the evolution of a common disorder
O. Sacks
U CAl press 1970

Brain Damage, Behavior, And The Mind
M. Williams
John Wiley & Sons 1979
ch 5 Disorders of visual perception

Mescal And Mechanisms Of Hallucinations
Heinrich Kluver
U. Chicago Press 1930

Drugs And The Brain
Perry Black MD, Ed
Johns Hopkins Press 1969
behavioral effects of LSD in subhuman primates


Hallucinations
Sci Am
R.K.Siegal
(see also article on phosphenes in amateur scientist column in
another issue)

X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X

 Another file downloaded from:                               NIRVANAnet(tm)

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Jeff Hunter          510-935-5845
 The Salted Slug                          Strange              408-454-9368
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408-363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510-527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           415-583-4102
 Tomorrow's 0rder of Magnitude            Finger_Man           415-961-9315
 My Dog Bit Jesus                         Suzanne D'Fault      510-658-8078
 New Dork Sublime                         Demented Pimiento    415-566-0126

   Specializing in conversations, obscure information, high explosives,
        arcane knowledge, political extremism, diverse sexuality,
       insane speculation, and wild rumours. ALL-TEXT BBS SYSTEMS.

  Full access for first-time callers.  We don't want to know who you are,
   where you live, or what your phone number is. We are not Big Brother.

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"

X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
