CRACKING THE CRACK HABIT

There's an epidemic in our midst!! A plague so ominous, so black, so evil
hovers over this modern day age. Its victims are consumed, to the very depths 
of their being. They are snared and held in bondage, tormented and tortured 
inside out. This plague knows no social barriers. It consumes rich and poor 
alike and is color blind as it grabs one's life, and gains control of the 
depths of the soul. 

This vile disgusting creature is called CRACK or rock. Technically it's the 
derivative of cocaine base. It promises you the moon and gives emptiness and 
misery instead. It deceives you. It holds you in a demonic bondage of twisted 
satisfaction, pain and torture. It offers you a fleeting euphoria that turns 
in the end to despair and emptiness. Like a deadly cobra it spits poison: 
fear, paranoia and mental insanity. Its victims become prisoners held in 
bondage to the craving for the need for a taste, for that momentary elusive 
euphoria or high. Prisons are full, grave yards packed to testify of the 
heinous effects of crack or rock cocaine. 

The fact is that this plague is Satanic. The Bible portrays the character of 
Satan and his influences. For instance in John 8:44 he is described as a 
murderer from the beginning. This is evident as we see the deaths caused 
through drugs and alcohol, violence and sin. This verse also states that Satan 
is a liar, this is also true. He is the master of deception and has deceived 
multitudes to seek false satisfaction through a drug or alcohol high. But this 
is all a lie! There is no real satisfaction in a drug high. It's all Satanic 
deception and the end result is pain, emptiness and inner misery. The final 
end is torment of the soul, not peace, joy or tranquillity. 

Further on in the Bible in John 10:10 Satan is called a thief who has come to 
steal, kill and to destroy. Crack, cocaine and the drug high, the partying 
lifestyle is one of the numerous tricks he utilizes. I see and talk to the men 
incarcerated in prison. I've seen the pain as I've looked in the eyes of 17 
year old prostitutes, and the young people who will steal from their parents 
in order to get high. Yes, I've seen and experienced the reality of Satan's 
tactics. He' s out to rob, kill and destroy. But there's a cure! There is a 
solution to the plague that rumbles in our midst. There's a source that will 
supply the Joy, Peace and Freedom for which the soul of man craves and cries. 

My friend that source is JESUS CHRIST. As one comes to HIM and experiences His 
love and the forgiveness that's through His Blood shed upon Calvary's CROSS, 
they find freedom and satisfaction. John 8:36 says, "If the SON therefore 
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." Only in Jesus can we find the 
peace, joy and liberty the soul seeks. He is the ROCK that never falters. As 
one comes to Him, admitting they are sinners, and asking God's forgiveness, 
receiving his love, mercy and redemption they taste of God's Grace. As one 
repents or turns from his sinful wickedness and turns toward God he 
experiences the peace of Christ's righteousness, the joy of salvation. 

Jesus is the cure. He is the solution to the emptiness and pain of your soul. 
Pray and ask God to set you free, trust fully in the Blood bought redemption 
of JESUS CHRIST. There's freedom in Him and peace that passes all 
understanding. 

Other Bible Helps: 

 Matthew 11:28-30 
 John 5:24; 14:6 & 27 
 Romans 10:9-10 
 I Corinthians 1:25-31 
 Ephesians 1:7, 2:8-9. 

by Bro. Mickey Park -  inmate missionary 

Set Free to Serve 

Reprint permission was granted to Computers for Christ #22 for the expressed
purpose of posting this tract in electronic form. Please DO NOT modify this 
file nor distribute hard copies of this file. 

Printed copies for distribution are available from the Gospel Tract Society 
for a donation. 

The Gospel Tract Society is supported by our contributions. Please help them 
continue their work by sending them a contribution today.

 The Gospel Tract Society, Inc.
 P.O. Box 1118
 Independence, MO 64061



