Smuggling and Dope.  By John Shaver

From TAP # 80 12-82

This is the first of many articles that I plan to write for TAP about a subject
that is very dear to my heart.... DOPE.  I have been reading TAP for a while 
and absolutely LOVE Dr. Atomic's Underground Drug News.  Like most "dopies", I
read all of the mags devoted to the world of drugs and drug related objects.  
Not to undermine Dr. Atomic, but my articles will consist mainly of how-to
information about drug related objects and drug smuggling.  Correct me if I am 
wrong, but Dr. Atomic writes mainly about the how-to aspect of the chemistry-
drug field.
   In my first article, I would like to tell you about an incident which hap-
pended to me while I was overseas in Europe.  Anyone who wants to get his hands
on some cheap hash or coke should consider making a trip to Europe.  Many cheap
charter flights fly out of New York and  a major haul could more than pay for 
the trip.
   In Berlin, I purchased ten grams of has on the street for 8 German marks per
gram.  For those who are not up to date on the exchange rate of US dollars to
Marks, the price is translated into $3.85 per gram!  But how good is the hash 
you ask?  Well, a friend and I smoked a rolled up cigarette laced with a small
amount of hash while on the return flight to New York and in a matter of 
five minutes, we were knocked out.  When the plane began to fly upside down,
we knew we were stoned off our asses.  Incidentally, one should smoke hash in 
the lavatory of the jet, not in one's seat!
   And now for the real shocking truth...Coke sells in Berlin for the amazingly
low price of $50 per gram.  This coke is as good as any here in the USA and is
the best I have found for free-basing.  Other good deals include Heroin and an
occasional hit of LSD.  All of these harder drugs are extremely cheap and 
surprisingly cheap.
   How can I smuggle the hash, etc. into the US of A?  Here are a few sugges-
tions I know to work very well.  First, when going through customs in the US,
wear a business suit and a tie.  The customs officials will be less likely to 
ask you to open your suit case if you look presentable.  Another suggestion is 
never to make jokes and laugh while standing in line at customs.  Those SOB's
have been know  to strip 80 year old women who joke around in line..... just 
makes yourself as status-quo as possible.
   What if custom officials do decide to examine your luggage?  One way which I
smuggled in some great shash was by cutting a bar of soap in half, hollowing it
out, and packing the dope inside.  Then put  the bar back together and use 
water to seal it.  Even the best dog couldn't smell through that type of pack-
ing.  For larger "shipments", conceal it in any type of regular container and 
put it in a plastic garbage bag.  Then  put all of your dirty clothes on top of
it and top that owith your dirty underwear.  No self respecting customs agent 
will root through a bunch of smelly clothes to the bottem.  If you want to hide
toe drugs on your person, the best place is your crotch.  Be sure he isn't 
queer if he decides to frisk you.
   Fine, I know the city and the means of getting the drugs back, but how the
hell do I find the street where the drugs are located?  Berlin is a large city
and one needs a map to find the arreas I am talking about.  If you write to 
me care of TAP I will be more than happy to send you a map with the areas 
marked, and even send you info on where the cheapest airlines are located.
Roundtrip to Berlin from New York can be as cheap as $450!


General Dbase #7: (?=Menu, 1-20) ->:  
WHICH 1-110 (?=MENU,<CR>):
(>View: THE BEST O  F TAP PART VII
106

(CTRL-S STOP/START  SPACEBAR TO EXIT)


     New Economic Policy.  By the Stainless Steal Rat.

TAP # 80 12-82

Tired of all that bullshit the government has been giving about how to reduce
inflation?  Well here is the real way to cut your bills:

   I Super-Markets
   The next time you visit your local rippoff center that claims to have the
lowest prices in town, you can make sure that they keep that promise.
When you catch an employee loafing on the job borrow (permanently) his or her
little price tag gun.  After several minutes of examination and trial you can
stamp your own prices just like the pro.  Need I go further?  Of couse.  Just 
for good relations take all those funny little rolls of stickers that are used
to show when there is a special and all the blank rolls for the tag gun. Beware
 Make sure that the product you stamp with your gun is the same as the tag is.
Some tags are pre labled: Grocery, candy, milk, etc.  Make sure the tag matches
the item.  Never remark items that are common.  Many times the cashiers know 
the price.  Also, with your "special" strikers be careful.  Many times they are
distributed by the manufacturer of the product.  If you are in a hurry just 
take the price tag off the cheapest bargin brand and put it on the best quality
brand.  This can be tricky if not impossible becausee some places have price
tags that are pre-cut, so they fall apart if you try that.

   II Counter Espionage and other Tricks for all of you that shoplift (or are 
about to begin) here are some tips:
   -Stay away from large Malls and Shopping centers, it's like narc city. The 
Narcs like it there because they can bust little kids for shoplifting candy.
   -Keep your eyes open for mirrors, two way mirrors, cameras and nosey clerks.
   -If you are with a partner keep your mouth shut.  They have hidden mics in 
those tall columns that seem to hold up the roof.
   -Avoid all large silvered objects.  In on place I know, they put small 
cameras in large christmas balls (Merry Christmas Huh?)
   -Look for people that you always see in the same store and for people who 
walk around like zombies and pay more attention to the people in the store than
the products.
   -Avoid all people with 2-way radios.  They are most definitly no hams with 
their 2 meter.
   If you decide to shoplift (naughty you), remember all you have to do is 
remove the item from its package and take off all store marking and tags and 
they cannot prove the item is not yours.  Use display models if possible, be-
cause you can fiddle with them without suspicion.  If  you think the risk of 
getting caught is too great or you cannot get it because of its size (I know a
guy who shoplifted a 20" crock pot) you can still get it at a greatly reduced
price.  Many places use felt tip markers or pens to show reductions.  When a 
store has a clearance sale just come on in and make your own reductions (not 
too outrageous please).  Sometime the cashier will be suspicious and go and 
check your items price against one on the shelf.  The only way to beat this is
to mark all the items down.  This way you can also buy several and you do a 
public service for the regular customers.  My last trick is to use a high 
quality eraser and erase the first digit of the price.  I have done this one 
several times with chips and other expensive parts.  Some of those clerks ar as
blind as riveted bulkheads.  The real price was stamped on the package right 
next to the erased price tag.  I still saved 10 American (worthless dollars)

                Happy Budget Cutting. The Stainless Steal Rat.
