
 Msg: #3109  Sec: 7 - Lyric Notes
      11-Mar-89  11:32 PM
Subj: Fugazi
From: Gareth Desmond
  To: Fish

][ Fugazi ][


Vodka intimate, an affair with isolation in a blackheath cell Extinguishing
the fires in my private hell Provoking the heartache to renew the licence Of a
bleeding heart poet in a fragile capsule Propping up the crust of the glitter
conscience Wrapped in the christening shawl of a hangover Baptised in tears
from the real

Drowning in the liquid seize on the piccadilly line, rat race Scuttling
through the damp electric labyrinth (Caress Ophilias hand with breaststroke
ambition The Albotross courtship, marrytime tradition) Sheathed within the
walkman wear the halo of distortion Aural contraceptive aborting preganant
conversation (But she turned the harpoon and it pierced my heart And crucified
herself around my neck) From the Time-Life-guardians in their conscience
bubbles Safe and dry in my sea of troubles Nine to fives with suitable ties
While I'm cast adrift as their sideshow, peepshow, stereo hero Becalm,
bestill, bewitch, drowning, drowning in the real

The thief of Baghdad hides in islington now Praying deportation for his sacred
cow A legacy of romance from a twilight world The dowry of a relative mystery
girl A Vietnamese flower, a dockland union A mistress of release from a
magazine's thighs This magdalene contracts more than favours The feeding hands
- More (Y)/N/NS? 
of Western promise hold her by the throat

A son of the swastika of 45' parading a peroxide standard Graffitti Disciples
conjure testaments of hatred Aerosol wands whisper where the searchlights trim
the barbwire hedges This is Brixton chess A knight for embankments folds his
newspaper castle A creature of habit, begs the boatman's coin He'll fade with
old soldiers in the grease-stained roll call Linger with the heartburn of Good
Friday's last supper

Son watches father scan obituary columns in search of absent school friends
While a generation digests high fiber ignorance Cowering behind curtains and
the taped up, painted windows Decriminalized genocide, providing door to door
belsens


(REply Quit ?): 

 Msg: #3110  Sec: 7 - Lyric Notes
      11-Mar-89  11:38 PM
Subj: Fugazi cont.
From: Gareth Desmond
  To: Fish



Pandora's box of holocausts gracefully cruising satelite infested heavens
Waiting, the season of the button, the penultimate migration Radioactive
perfumes, for the fashionably, for the terminally insane, insane Do you
realize, do you realize, this world is totally Fugazi

Where are the prophets, where are the visionaries, where are the poets To
breach the dawn of the sentimental mercenary Where are the prophets, where are
the visionaries, where are the poets To breach the dawn of the sentimental
mercenary...

Marillion- Fugazi (Fugazi)

Gareth Desmond
