 
  
  
                         How To Make DMT 
  
DMT stands for N,N-dimethyltryptamine. It is a semisynthetic  
compound similar to psilocin(the hallucinogenic substance in  
psilocybin) ins structure. The most common method of ingestion is  
smoking. Soaked parsley leaves are the usual method of ingestion  
although persons have dipped marijuana in it and said the  
experience was fantastic. The following recipe can be performed in  
the kitchen. 
  
Recipe for DMT: 
  
1. Mix thoroughly and dissolve 25 grams of indole with a pound of  
dry ethyl ether in a 2000 ml flask(2 quart jar.) 
  
2. Take an ice tray and fill with chipped or shaved ice. Cool  
solution for about 35 minutes until it reaches 0 degrees C. At the  
same time cool 50 ml dry oxalychloride to about 5 degrees below 0  
C. in the same ice tray. 
  
3. VERY slowly add the oxalychloride solution to the indole  
solution. These two chemicals are highly reactive. Avoid boiling  
over, contact with skin, and fumes. 
  
4. Wait until all the bubbling has died down, then add a few  
handfuls of table salt to the ice tray, to cool the solution  
further. Label the solution "solution 1" and put it in the  
freezer. 
  
5. Cool 100 ml. of dry ethyl ether in a 500 ml. flask to 0 degrees  
C. in a salted ice tray. At the same time cool an unopened bottle  
of dimethylamine to 0 degrees C. in the same ice bath. 
  
6. Open the seal of the dimethylamine bottle and slowly pour a  
steady stream into the ether. Label "solution 2." 
  
7. Very slowly and carefully add solution "1" and "2" together. 
  
8. Now take the mixed solutions from the ice tray and bring up to  
room temperature stirring the solution all the time. You should be  
left with a solution that is almost clear. If it is still murky,  
continue stirring until it becomes as clear as possible. 
  
9. Now filter the solution to seperate the precipitate by suction. 
  
                       <---Solution and Precipitate 
        ------------ 
        \          /<---Funnel  /    / <-- Rubber hose to 
         \        /     and    /    /      Vacuum source 
          \      /      Filter/____/ 
     \*****\    /*************{   }*****/ <--- Two hole 
      \****{    }*************{   }****/       rubber stopper 
       \   {    }             {   } <-/--- Glass Tube 
        \  {    }             {   }  / 
         | {    }             {   } | 
         |                          | 
         |                          | 
         |                          | 
         |                          | 
         |__________________________| 
                  Figure A. 
             
10. Refilter with suction after pouring technical ether over the  
precipitate. 
  
11. Repeat filtering once more with ether, then twice with water. 
  
12. Let this substance dry on a plastic or china plate.(do not use  
metal) After drying, a solid material will be formed. Take  
particles and place them in an 800 ml beaker. 
  
13. Mix 100 ml. benzene with 100 ml. methyl alcohol. After this  
mixture has been stirred, cover solid particles from step 12 with  
about 1/2 inch of the solution and heat the beaker in water until  
all solid material had dissolved. Add more solvent if  
necessary.(Note: Do not place beaker in water bath directly over  
the flame.) 
  
14. After all solid material has dissolved, remove beaker from the  
heat, and allow to cool. As it cools, small needle-shaped crystals  
will appear. When this happens, try to pour off as much solvent as  
possible without disturbing the crystals. 
  
15. Place crystals in a 1000 ml flask and dissolve in  
tetrahydrofurane.(Use only as much as absolutely necessary.) Label  
this solution "A". 
  
16. Slowly mix 200 ml. tetrahydrofurane and 20 grams lithium  
aluminum hydride in a 500 ml flask, and label it solution "B". 
(By the way, lithuim aluminum hydride ignites on contact with  
moisture. Protect eyes and hands.) 
  
17. Mix solutions "A" and "B" slowly, stirring constantly. 
  
18. Prepare a water bath and heat solution for three hours,  
stirring for four minutes every half hour. When not stirring, make  
sure to use aspirator tube. 
                             /  / <--- Rubber Tubing 
                             --- 
                         \**{   }**/<---- One hole rubber stopper       
                         /**{   }**\      and glass tubing  
                        /   {   }   \ 
                       /    {   }    \ 
                       :             :  
                       :             :         
                       :             : 
      \ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:_____________:~/ 
       \______________________________/ 
  
           Heat source 
  
           Figure B. 
  
Place Figure B. flask at a higher level than Figure A. flask. Run  
tube from Figure B. flask down to left side of figure A. flask,  
replacing funnel with glass tubing. Disconnect right side tube  
from vacuum source. This will be used as the aspirator tube. 
  
19. When this is completed, allow the flask to remain at room  
temperature for about 20 minutes. Then place in salted ice bath,  
and cool to 0 degrees C. Add a small amount of chilled methanol,  
stirring gently until solution appears murky. 
  
20. Filter this murky solution through a paper filter in a funnel,  
and collect the filtered liquid in a flask. 
  
21. Add 100 ml. of tetrahydrofuran through the filter and collect  
in the same flask. Now heat the solution in a water bath until  
most of the tetrahydrofuran is evaporated and a gooey substance  
remains. 
  
22. Place little piles of this substance on a cookie tray and dry  
with a heat lamp for three or four hours. 
  
Well, after all that you now have DMT. Was it worth it? To ingest,  
crumble a small quantity with parsley or mint, and smoke. Do not  
inject. Do not mix with tobacco. 
  
  
                     Keep your thoughts free 
                      and your reality...err 
                            different. 
  
                          - Black Adder 
  
Call Spatula City (707) 451-2835. 
Amiga 14.4 HST. 
  
 
 [0;1m 
 
