         ________________________
        /  Obtaining Licit Drugs \____________________________
       |     Hella Cheap                                      \
       |                                                       |
       |         -=> The Azure Mage <=-          This is       |
       |                  of                     The Year      |
       |              The U.P/P.G.               Of the Cow.   |
       |                  and                      1990.       |
       |              The A.N.R.C.                             |
       |                                                       |
       |        Better Living thru Social Engineering          |
        \_____________________________________________________/



-=: Introduction :=-

   Well, this phile came into being when I was thinking about the trouble that
a person who enjoys doing something that society frowns upon could get into.
I'm sure that all of you that are reading this phile can relate to this fact. 
It wasn't about phreaking that I was thinking about but Chemical Intoxication.
That's right. Drugs. Neural Death in a pill. Your gateway into the Land of 
Else. So I said to myself "Self, why do you bother with going out and trying 
to score when right there down the street there is a chemically pure source of
your current abusable of choice (I was feeling the need for speed) in the
pharmacy?". So the next station down on this train  of thought was "How in the
hell can I liberate a quantity of Meth or Dextroamphetamine Sulfate or a
concoction of Amphetamine resin in a combination with one of the above?". The 
answer, Dear Reader, lies just down the edge of your monitor.

-=: The Phile proper :=-

   Ok, now think for a moment. Who possesses the unlimited access to those
wonders of modern chemical engineering that you enjoy so much (I speak to
those who enjoy the pharmaceutical type adulterants; Valium, Pharmaceutical
grade meth, Nembutal, Seconal and the rest of the barbiturate clan). That's 
right, 2 people. Your friendly neighborhood Pharmacist and your friendly
neighborhood doctor. Our plan is keyed on the latter person. It would help if
you knew that there was a doc that sold scripts for cash. If you are so lucky
then you can simply say "I want a script for 180 dextroamphet sulfate tabs 15 
mg strength" and begin negotiation for the price. But if you are like the 
meajority of us, you won't so on to the next step. The second step would be to 
find a doctor that has written a script for the drug that you are seeking.
This accomplishes the purpose of establishing the fact that he doesn't have a 
predjudice against that particular drug. Hell, he may believe that it's the 
worst thing since Pearl Harbor. If you can't find a doc that meets the 
following criteria, let your fingers do the walking. Preferably find a newly
established doc (he's naive) and with doctoral selection complete on to Phase 
II.

   Phase II consists of acquiring a set of false ID. There are many books
on the subject and hella philes typed on it so that's not my bag. The 
usefulness of it may not be evident, but in the beginning stages of your
career of social engineering, you may manage to offend the morals of the doc
so badly that even though what you are doing is not illegal, he may attempt to
alert the authorities as to your activities. This might lead to all kinds of
things, like monitoring of your phone lines, ect. Oh, incidentally, this phile
is targeted for those who are over say 17 or so or have sufficient maturity
and mental agility to pass. Let common sense be your guide.

   Phase III is the vital one. Research on the drug that you are seeking and
compiliation of your story. First, if you got your doc by knowing he wrote a
script, then go to the person that he wrote the script for. Ask them what they
told the doc, what lab tests were taken, ect. Take copius notes and
incorporate the things he said into your story. If the doc is too involved
(you may be able to bullshit him, but lab tests don't lie) and moral, than you 
might be better off going with the Yellow Pages. Take your body to the library
and begin your research. First, examine the drug that you are seeking. The
trick to all of this is to present the doc with a set of symptoms that
virtually match those that the drug is prescribed for. If you do it good
enough, then he will prescribe it for you. Would the symptoms that the drug
that you want require substantiating lab tests? If so, then investigate the
rest of the members of the chemical family. If the chemical structure is
changed a little, then the drug works differently while possibly keeping the
side effects that you want. Also, there might be combinations that would be
better for you. Like methamphet HCL is killer, but a combination of methamphet
and say amphet resin which is longer acting would be quite nice. Once you have
selected the target drug, compose your story. Bring all of the symptoms
together with an underlying cause. Make it believeable. If I were you, I would
start out with the easy drugs until I got a feel for how to do it. Like
Valium. It's not for nothing that so many people are hooked on it. Docs push 
it out like candy. Complaints of a little anxiety, trouble sleeping, can't 
concentrate, failing Chem 130, Eng 220 and A&P 235/6, and you really can't 
take it anymore and it's got to come to an end or you don't know what you will
do and POW!, you'll be enjoying a benzodiazepine haze before you knew what hit 
you. Practice. A story of anxiety, tension and stress won't be believed if 
delivered in a monotone. If possible, tweak your body to deliver some obvious
physical collations to your story. Like stay up for 36 hours before going to
get that drawn, anxious, I need to be sedated look. Or that I haven't slept 
for 36 hours and I need some Seconal look. And that's basically it. I figure 
that at the least I have passed on a technique that can be applied to many
aspects of society. Look for more philes bearing my name cause they are the
shit (a non-abashed plug for me). Oh and another advantage is that there is so
way in hell that a script filled be a pharmacist would be as costly as the
equivalent on the street. Plus the cops can't crack you for having it. Later.


This has been a BluCorp Presentation, Darlink.


-sieze



X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
