
Describes growing conditions and needs of various psychoactive plants.
O.C.R. by Dr. Rat, I.C.R. Laboratories Inc. 1992
ICRCAT000002



                           Growing the Hallucinogens

             How to Cultivate and Harvest Legal Psychoactive Plants

                               by Hudson Grubber

                             20th Century Alchemist

    -----------------------------------------------------------------------
    | This book is offered for educational and informational purposes.    |
    | The author and publisher advocate no illegal activities of any      |
    | kind, and make no express or implied warranties of merchantability, |
    | fitness for any purpose, or otherwise, with respect to this         |
    | book. For medical, legal, or spiritual advice, we urge that you     |
    | consult the appropriate practitioner.                               |
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------

The purpose of this book is to introduce the reader to the general arts of
plant cultivation and propagation, and to give specific information on
growing certain psychoactive plants.

For each plant we give a brief description, and the methods of cultivation,
propagation, and harvesting.

There are sections on general propagation and cultivation techniques in the
beginning of the book. Propagation has been stressed because adequate
information is often lacking in garden books. These sections explain the
terminology used in the information found under each plant. A list of
suppliers of seeds, cuttings, and dried herbs may be found at the end of
this book.

Complete information on the preparation, dosage, use, active constituents,
effects and side effects of the plant materials discussed in this book can
be found in another publication from the Twentieth Century Alchemist
entitled ~Legal Highs~.

At the time of this writing, the plants covered in this book are legal. It
may interest some readers that the Church of the Tree of Life has declared
as religious sacraments most of the plants in this book, thereby protecting
its members from any future legislation involving these plants. Those
seeking further information should send a stamped, self-addressed envelope
to the Church of the Tree of Life, 405 Columbus Avenue, San Francisco,
California 94133.

Some of the plants discussed in ~Legal Highs~ and ~Growing the
Hallucinogens~ contain substances which are forbidden by law. As examples,
San Pedro contains mescaline, and morning glory and Hawaiian wood rose
seeds contain lysergic acid amides. The general application of the law
appears to be that it is legal for a person to cultivate these plants, as
long as no steps are taken that could be interpreted as intent to ingest
them for psychoactive effects.

This book is about gardening. It contains accurate information on the
cultivation and harvesting of the plants in question. It should not be
construed as encouragement or endorsement of the use of these plants for
hallucinogenic purposes.

I wish to thank my wife for typing this manuscript.

- H.G.



PROPAGATION

Propagation is the reproduction of plants, and is accomplished by two
different means. One is by seeds or spores (the normal reproductive process
of plants), the other is by vegetative propagation, which involves
cuttings, layers, division, separation, or graftings.



SEEDS

The seeds of many annuals will germinate (sprout) readily when sown
directly in the ground in spring. Other plants have seeds with hard
seedcoats or dormancies that must be broken before they will grow. Methods
of doing so include:

Nicking and Soaking: Large seeds often benefit from soaking in water
overnight or until swollen. Some seeds, such as the mescal bean and large
woodrose, will refuse to swell unless the seed coat is nicked or scratched
first. With a knife, small file, or hacksaw blade, scrape away a small
portion of the seedcoat on the side opposite the hilum or germ eye (the
small dent where the seed sprouts). The hole should not be big, just large
enough for water to enter during soaking.

When soaking any seed, be sure to plant it as soon as it is swollen, as
some seeds will drown if left for long in the water.

Stratification: Some seeds need to be stratified before they will
germinate. This process involves placing the seed in damp peat moss or
sand, and storing at a low temperature until dormancy is broken.

Chemicals: Chemicals are sometimes used for seeds with hard seedcoats that
are not affected by stratification or soaking. In nature, these seeds have
their coats softened by the digestive juices of birds and animals that eat
them. Acids such as vinegar or sulfuric acid, and alkalies like sodium
hypochlorite (Clorox) are used. The seeds must be thoroughly washed after
treatment.

Scalding Seeds: Other hard-shelled seeds, particularly in the bean family,
are best treated with boiling water. To do this, place the seeds in a
teacup, and pour boiling water over them. The water is allowed to cool and
the seeds are soaked until they swell. This may be repeated with any seed
that does not swell after the first time.

Peat Moss: This is a very good medium in which to sprout seeds. Put some
milled sphagnum moss (peat moss) in a plastic bag. Add water and knead
thoroughly until the moss is uniformly damp. Fill a shallow pan or aluminum
pie tin about 1 inch deep with the damp moss. Cover with plastic wrap, or a
sheet of glass. Seeds may be started on the surface of the moss or buried
in it; with or without bottom heat.

Bottom Heat: This hastens germination of many seeds. To provide bottom
heat, take a strong corrugated cardboard box and turn it upside down with a
40-watt light inside. Cut slits or small holes in the bottom to let the
heat through to the flats or seed pans. Be sure that the heat will not cook
the seedlings, as different seed pans or flats transmit different amounts
of heat.

When sowing seeds a general rule is to cover them with soil two or three
times their thickness. Very small seeds, like coleus or tobacco, should be
just slightly covered or pressed into the surface. Small seeds may also be
mixed with sand to insure even distribution.

The soil for all seeds should be light and porous.

Seedlings should be transplanted after the second pair of true leaves
opens. Transplanting is preferably done on a cool cloudy day. The
transplant should be shaded for several days.



VEGETATIVE PROPAGATION

Hardwood Cuttings: These are cuttings of dormant twigs or stems of woody
plants. Such a cutting is usually taken in fall or winter. There should be
two to four nodes or buds on the stem. This is inserted at an angle in
sand, peat moss, or a combination of the two, with only the top bud
projecting. It is then left in a cool place where it will not freeze, for
the duration of winter. During this time the lower end will heal over or
callus. In the spring, it is planted in a sandy soil where it will root
readily, especially if the lower buds are removed.

Greenwood Cuttings: These are cuttings made of shoots of plants that are
mature enough to break when bent sharply. These cuttings are rooted indoors
in sand, gravel, or sandy peat moss almost up to the lower leaves. The
lower leaves are often removed or cut to reduce the area exposed to air and
so prevent wilting. The cuttings should have some leaves, though, as this
will help them to root faster. They should be shaded and have gentle bottom
heat. Many herbaceous plants maybe rooted in water. When rooting this way,
never place the cuttings in more than 2 inches of water, as deep water does
not absorb enough oxygen for good root development. If the cutting wilts,
clip the leaves in half to reduce surface area, or placed a jar upside down
over it. Rootone, a rooting hormone, may be used to hasten root growth.
Plants from which cuttings are to be taken should receive plenty of
sunlight for several days before the cutting is made. This builds up the
sugar-energy storage and improves the success of the cutting.

Root Cuttings: These may be taken from any plant that produces sprouts from
the roots. They are made from roots the thickness of a pencil to 0.5 inch
thick, and 3 to 5 inches long. They need not show buds as buds will develop
later. They are treated similarly to hardwood cuttings except that in the
spring they are placed horizontally in the soil and entirely covered to a
depth, of 1 to 2 inches.

Ground Layering: This is a method of rooting shoots while they are still
attached to the parent plant. It is often used with plants whose cuttings
refuse to root. Select a low-growing branch that can be bent to the ground.
Make a slanting cut halfway through the branch at a point about 12 inches
from the end, and just below a joint. Then wedge it open with a pebble.
Bury the cut in about 4 inches of soil and anchor it with a stone. Stake up
the end of the branch so that it extends above the soil line. Keep the soil
moist, and carefully dig down to the cut every few months to check if
rooting has taken place. Once rooted, the branch may be severed from the
parent plant and grown like an ordinary cutting.

Air Layering: This is similar to ground layering but may be done with any
branch. Select a branch from pencil size up to one inch thick. Make a
slanting cut halfway through the branch. Wedge the cut open with a
matchstick and dust the cut lightly with rooting hormone. With thick
branches, a ring of bark should be removed instead of cutting the branch.
Surround it with a handful of damp peat moss and enclose it with plastic
wrap. Tie the wrap at both ends with wire tape. The peat moss should be
kept damp. Check it frequently during the summer. In a month or two roots
will form and the branch may be severed and treated like an ordinary
cutting.

Division: This is the process of dividing plants that have root stocks or
tubers, or which produce suckers (young plants rising from the base of the
older plants). This may be achieved by breaking up large clumps of plants
such as heliotrope, or cutting tubers or rootstocks into sections
containing buds, as is done with potatoes or hops. Division is usually
performed during the dormant season.

Separation: This is a form of division. It is the process of separating
bulblets from the main bulb in the same way garlic is propagated, and
setting them out to be new plants.



CULTIVATION

When cultivating plants make sure that your soil has been well worked and
has been fertilized properly. The addition of humus, sand, or compost
assures a workable soil.

Start seedlings in flats and transplant when a few leaves have formed.
Transplanting is best done on an overcast, cool, cloudy or foggy day. Keep
the roots intact as much as possible and perform your repotting swiftly and
gently. Water thoroughly and shade the plant for a few days.

Do not overwater your plants. Water them thoroughly and deeply but
infrequently. The roots draw upon water 1 foot or more below the surface;
therefore the wetness of the soil's surface is not important. I I have
found that the most common cause of death among house plants is
overwatering.

Volumes have been written on the basics of plant cultivation. Your local
library will have many good books on the subject.

Plants should be grown with joy in one's heart and with calmness in one's
actions. If you dislike your plants or the responsibility they represent
they will often refuse to grow.

If you like your plants and treat them as your friends, they will respond
favorably and not mind as much when you use them for your purposes. In
controlled experiments under laboratory conditions it has been demonstrated
that plants react to people's emotions. Plants that were treated with
affection grew faster and larger than those that were not.



PESTICIDES

The subject of pesticides is too involved to discuss here. A very good
pamphlet entitled ``Pesticides and Your Environment'' has been put out by
the National Wildlife Federation (see Suppliers). It tells sources of
ladybugs, praying mantises, and lacewings (all beneficial insects), gives
information on companion planting, and has lists of desirable and
undesirable pesticides.

This pamphlet suggests that nicotine sulfate not be used. This is due to
its highly poisonous nature, rather than because of any damage to the
environment. Otherwise this insecticide has the advantage that it
evaporates completely, leaving no residue.

Isopropyl (rubbing) alcohol has been used as a spray, but it can ``burn''
tender plants. If used it should be tested on a few leaves first. If the
leaves wither in a few days, another pesticide must be used.



                         THE HALLUCINOGENS



BELLADONNA
~Atropa belladonna~ L.;
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

A perennial branching herb growing to 5 feet tall, with 8-inch-long ovate
leaves. The leaves in first-year plants are larger than those of older
plants. The flowers are bell-shaped, blue-purple or dull red, followed by a
shiny, black or purple 0.5-inch berry. Native of Europe and Asia.

Cultivation and Propagation: Belladonna is hardy throughout the U.S., dying
back in winter and rising from the root in spring. It prefers a
well-drained, well-limed soil in full sun or part shade. The soil should be
kept moist at all times. Plants exposed to too much sun will be stunted. In
hot sunny areas it may be grown between rows of beans to shade it.

Belladonna is most frequently propagated by seed, sown in flats in early
March. Because the seeds take gd weeks to germinate, they should be started
early. When the seedlings are an inch or so high they may be set out 18
inches apart. The seedlings should be well watered just after
transplanting, and shaded for several days. First-year plants will grow
only 1.5 feet high and will flower in September. At this time the leaves
and tops may be collected, but the plants should not be entirely stripped.
The plants should be thinned to 2.5 to 3 feet apart at the approach of
winter, or overcrowding will occur the second year. In June of the second
year the plants may be cut to one inch above the ground when they are in
flower. In good years a second crop will be ready for harvesting in
September. The roots may be harvested in the autumn of the fourth year, and
new plants set in their places. Belladonna may also be propagated by
cuttings of the green branch tips.

I have found that snails, aphids, and white flies are among this plant's
worst enemies. Small children are much more susceptible to belladonna
poisoning than adults, and should be kept away from it.

Harvesting: The parts harvested as described above should be dried quickly
in the sun. Wilted or discolored leaves may be discarded, as they contain
only small amounts of alkaloids.



BETEL NUT
~Areca catechu~ L.;
Palm family (Palmaceae)

A very slender, graceful palm growing up to 100 feet tall but with a trunk
only 6 inches in diameter. This is topped by a crown of three 6-foot-long
leaves that are divided into many leaflets. The fruits are the size and
shape of a hen's egg and are yellowish to scarlet with a fibrous covering.
Native to Malaysia.

Cultivation and Propagation: May be grown out of doors in California and
Florida; must be grown in the greenhouse elsewhere. Young plants do well in
a mixture of equal parts leaf-mold or peat and loam. Water at least every
other day. If grown in the greenhouse, the temperature should be around 80
degrees fahrenheit during the day and about 60 degrees fahrenheit at night.

Harvesting: Betel nuts should be harvested when the fruits are ripe. The
acorn-sized nut is removed and washed free of pulp. An adult tree may
produce 250 nuts per year.



THE BROOMS
Bean family (Leguminosae)

There is some confusion as to which is the most potent of the three species
of brooms used for their psychotropic effects. According to the paper first
reporting the discovery of the effects of these plants, the blossoms of
Canary Island broom were the ``most pleasant and effective'' of the three.
This is also the species used by Yaqui shamans. Some herbals claim that
Spanish broom tops are five times as strong as Scotch broom, while other
sources claim that the alkaloid content of the Scotch broom is higher than
that of the other two. To clarify (or confuse) the issue, it has been found
that alkaloid content varies with environment.

Canary Island Broom (~Cytisus canariensis~ L., formerly ~Genista
canariensis~). A much-branched shrub to 6 feet tall with hairy branches,
covered with bright green leaves divided into three leaflets. This is the
only broom of the three that keeps its leaves through the year. It flowers
from May to July, and is covered with many bright yellow blossoms in short
racemes. It is damaged at 15 degrees fahrenheit but it recovers quickly.
Native to the Canary Islands.

Scotch Broom (~Cytisus scoparius~ L.). A shrub to 10 feet with many erect,
slender, almost leafless branches. The flowers are yellow, 0.75-inch long,
and bloom from March to June. Native to central and southern Europe;
naturalized in California and found sparingly in the East.

Spanish Broom (~Spartium junceum~ L.). A shrub to 10 feet high with slender
green branches and bearing a few small leaves. The flowers are yellow, 1
inch long, and fragrant, followed by 4-inch-long pods. Blooms from June to
September in most of the U.S. In California it flowers most of the year.
Native to the Mediterranean region.

Cultivation and Propagation: The brooms need a well-drained soil and full
sun. They often naturalize on dry, rocky slopes in the west. Scotch and
Spanish broom are hardy everywhere except in the most northern states,
while Canary Island broom is hardy only in the west and south. All are very
drought-resistant.

Brooms are easily propagated by seeds, cuttings, and layers. Seeds may be
started as early as January. They should be nicked and soaked until swollen
before sowing. Seedlings should be transplanted carefully when young; they
transplant well when older. Plants grown from seed will flower 1 year from
sowing. Cuttings should be young growth taken with a heel in early spring
or August and September. They should be rooted in sandy soil. When grown as
a pot or tub plant, they should be pruned after flowering. They should be
left outdoors from early spring until light frost in the fall. Brooms are
subject to attack by the genista worm in southern California. These are
difficult to control except with DDT.

Harvesting: Broom plants grown in full sun have a higher alkaloid content
than those grown in the shade. The flowers should be gathered, aged in a
sealed jar for 10 days, and dried at a low heat. The aging greatly reduces
the harshness of the smoke. The active flowering tops may be gathered in
May and dried without aging. Any material from pruning may also be used.



CABEZA DE ANGEL
~Calliandra anomala~ (Kunth) Macbride;
Bean family (Leguminosae)

Cultivation and Propagation: It may be grown out of doors in California and
the South, and in the greenhouse in the North. It needs plenty of water and
sunshine and will do well in a good garden soil. If grown indoors it should
be pruned after blooming and set out of doors for the summer.

Propagation is by seeds, which may require nicking and soaking before
germination will take place. When seeds are not available it may be
propagated by cuttings taken with a heel and planted in sand over bottom
heat.

Harvesting: Incisions are made in the bark in the early morning and the
exuding resin is collected after several days, dried and pulverized. The
incisions should be shallow and narrow so that they will heal quickly. Take
care not to cut too deep as this may permanently damage the plant.



CALAMUS
~Acorus calamus~ L.;
Arum family (Araceae)

A vigorous perennial herb growing up to 6 feet tall, composed of many long,
slender, grasslike leaves up to 0.75-inch wide rising from a horizontal
rootstock. The flowers are minute and greenish-yellow in color, occurring
on a 4-inch long spike resembling a finger. The fruit is berrylike. Native
to eastern North America, Europe and Asia.

Cultivation and Propagation: Calamus is hardy throughout the U.S. and much
of Canada. It thrives best in a rich soil, but can be grown in shallow
water on dry land. It is propagated by division of the rootstock in spring
or fall. Pieces of the rhizome should be planted horizontally, an inch or
two deep, a foot apart in each direction, with the leaf-shoots upward. They
can be planted in marshes and at the edges of ponds and streams. They will
do well in the garden if the soil is rich and is kept moist by frequent
waterings. Formerly it was maintained that calamus would not flower unless
its roots were submerged in water. This author, however, has seen many
exceptions to this belief.

Harvesting: The rhizomes should be collected when two to three years old,
in early spring before new growth, or in the late autumn. The leaves and
rootlets should be removed and the rhizomes washed thoroughly. They should
be dried without the application of heat. Upon drying, the rhizomes lose 70
to 75 percent of their weight, but improve in flavor and aroma. They should
be stored in a cool dry place, as calamus deteriorates with age, heat and
moisture. Also dried roots are often eaten by worms or small boring
beetles. After a year or so of storage the roots have lost much of their
active principle.



CALIFORNIA POPPY
~Eschscholzia californica~ Cham.;
Poppy family (Papaveraceae)

A perennial herb to 2 feet tall (usually less in the wild) with
bluish-green, finely-divided leaves. The flowers open in the sunshine, are
up to 4 inches across, and are on long stalks. On wild plants, the flowers
are four-petaled and orange-yellow, but there are many horticultural
varieties. It blooms from July 1st to October the first year, and again
each April in areas where it grows as a perennial. The fruit is a thin,
ribbed capsule 34 inches long. Native to California and Oregon; naturalized
in Europe.

Cultivation and Propagation: The California poppy is grown as an annual in
cold-winter area, and as a perennial in California and the South. The seeds
should be sown where the plants are to stand, as they don't transplant
well. They should be sown as early as weather permits. The plants like a
sunny exposure and do well on hillsides and dry, rocky places. In the
garden, the seedlings should be thinned so that the plants will stand 6 to
8 inches apart. They stand considerable cold and will continue to bloom
after the first frosts. In cold areas, if the roots are protected, the
plant will live over winter and bloom the following spring.

Harvesting: The outer leaves may be picked and dried at any time. The
flowers may be removed and seed capsules may be picked when unripe and
dried with the leaves. In autumn the plants should be cut off at the ground
and dried before they begin to wilt from the cold.

Note: The California poppy is the state flower of California and is
protected by a state law which provides stiff fines for people caught
picking or mutilating it. This law is not to keep people from getting high.
It is to protect the poppy, which is rapidly becoming wiped out by road
construction and land development.

The seeds are cheap and the plant easy to grow. If you plan on using this
poppy, please grow your own. Home-grown poppies are not subject to the law.



CATNIP
~Nepeta cataria~ L.;
Mint family (Labiatae)

A hardy, upright, perennial herb with sturdy stems bearing hairy,
heart-shaped, grayish-green leaves. The flowers are white or lilac,
0.25-inch long, and occur in several clusters toward the tips of the
branches. Native of Eurasia, naturalized in North America.

Cultivation and Propagation: It is easily cultivated in any garden soil,
with little care, as the plant does not require the moisture that most mint
plants need. Plants should be grown from seed sown where they are going to
stand. Bruised or recently transplanted plants are likely to be eaten by
cats unless protected. The seed should be sown very thinly in rows 20
inches apart and the seedlings thinned out to 20 inches apart in the rows.
It requires almost no care except occasional weeding. A bed will last
several years. It can also be propagated by division of the roots in
spring.

Harvesting: The herb is harvested just before flowering in middle to late
summer on a dry sunny day and in late morning when all dew is gone. Drying
should be done carefully. The leaves are stripped from the stems and dried
as quickly as possible with good ventilation out of direct sunlight, or in
an oven at 150 degrees fahrenheit to avoid losing much volatile oil.



CHICALOTE; PRICKLY POPPY
~Argemone mexicana~ L.;
Poppy family (Papaveraceae)

An annual herb 1 to 3 feet high with prickly stems, leaves and capsules.
The flowers are yellow or orange, up to 2.5 inches across, and followed by
an oblong seed capsule. The leaves are white-veined and 4 to 6 inches long.
Native to tropical America but naturalized in the southeastern U.S.

Cultivation and Propagation: Although generally grown as an annual, this
poppy is sometimes a biennial or perennial. It prefers a light soil but it
will do well in most soils if given a full sunny exposure. It is propagated
by seeds sown in early spring. The seedlings, like most poppies, dislike
transplanting, so the seeds are usually sown where they are to stand.
However, they may be sown in pots and, if replanted outside without
disturbing the roots, they will do well. It blooms in late summer and
reseeds itself readily.

Harvesting: The unripe capsules may be incised in the same manner as opium
poppies and an opium-like substitute obtained. However, the stout prickles
which cover the capsule make this difficult. The seed may be harvested by
keeping a close watch on the capsules and removing them when they first
begin to open, before the seeds spill out.



COLEUS
Mint family (Labiatae)

Two species of Coleus are used as hallucinogens; both are cultivated in the
U. S. They are:

~Coleus blumei~ Benth. This is the common cultivated coleus. A tender
perennial herb usually not exceeding 3 feet in height. The leaves are
ovate, pointed, 4 inches or more long, edged with rounded teeth. They are
mottled with red, green, yellow and purple. The flowers are dark blue or
whitish, in a terminal spike. Native to Java. Naturalized throughout the
tropics. A common house plant in the U.S.

~C. pumilus~. A low herb with lax stems which lie on the ground and root at
the lower joints, or hang over the sides of the pot. The leaves are smaller
than those of ~C. blumei~, usually not exceeding 2 inches long. The flowers
are in long racemes. Native to the Philippines.

Cultivation and Propagation: Coleus does best in strong, indirect light in
a warm, rich, loose, well-drained soil with ample water.

Coleus seeds should be started indoors in flats of fine soil covered with a
pan of glass or a sheet of plastic wrap. The seeds should be sown thinly
and covered with a thin layer of soil. With bottom heat they will come up
within two weeks. When large enough to handle, the seedlings should be
transplanted to pots. When all danger of frost is past the plants may be
set out in the garden.

Few plants root more easily than coleus. Cuttings may be taken at any time
of the year and rooted in shallow water.

Coleus plants should be fed regularly with a high nitrogen fertilizer to
stimulate foliage growth. Mealy-bugs and aphids are its worst enemies;
slugs and snails attack it in the garden.

Harvesting: All parts of the plant are psychoactive, but only the leaves
and flowering tops should be used, as new leaves will grow to replace them.
Flowering tops should be picked off before they seed, as they seriously sap
the energy of the rest of the plant. These may be stored in the freezer
along with fresh leaves that have fallen off until there are enough for a
dose. Dried leaves do not seem to have any effect. When picking fresh
leaves it is best to remove the lower leaves and take cuttings from the
branch tips. Some leaves should be left on the base of the plant to give it
energy to send out new shoots.



COLORINES
~Erythrina flabelliformis~ Kearny;
Bean family (Leguminosae)

A shrub or small tree growing up to 10 feet high with spiny branches and
leaves composed of fan-shaped leaflets. The flowers are bright scarlet, in
short crowded racemes. The pods are up to 1 foot long, containing bright
scarlet oval seeds. Native to southern Arizona, New Mexico, and Mexico.

Cultivation and Propagation: This ~erythrina~ may be grown outside in
California and Florida, but must be grown in the greenhouse in cold-winter
areas. It prefers a well-drained soil and full sun, and likes frequent
waterings but will stand considerable drought.

Propagated by seeds which need nicking and soaking, and by cuttings of
growing wood.

Harvesting: When the ripe pods begin to open in the fall they may be
gathered and the seeds removed.



DAMIANA
~Turnera diffusa~;
Turnera family (Turneraceae)

A small shrub with smooth inch-long, pale green leaves which have dense
hairs on the underside. The flowers are yellow, rising from the leaf axils,
followed by a one-celled capsule, which splits into three pieces. Native to
the Southwest and Mexico.

Cultivation and Propagation: Damiana may be planted outdoors in the South
and West, or in the greenhouse in the North. It thrives in any good soil if
given a sunny location. It should be watered freely from spring to fall,
and sparingly in winter. In the greenhouse the temperature should stand
around 55 degrees fahrenheit at night. Damiana is propagated by seeds and
cuttings.

Harvesting: The leaves and tops are harvested while the plant is in flower.
As some of the active principle is volatile, the tops are preferably dried
in the shade, without the application of heat.



DATURAS
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

This genus has 15 to 20 species ranging from annual and perennial herbs to
shrubs and trees, with trumpet-shaped flowers. All of these are
hallucinogenic.

Herbaceous Daturas

~Datura fastuosa~ L., formerly ~D. metel~. An annual herb, 4 to 5 feet
tall, with ovate 7- to 8-inch leaves. The flower is 7 inches long, white
inside, violet and yellowish outside, with a purple calyx. The fruit is a
1.25-inch-diameter spiny capsule. There are also double-flowered and blue-,
red-, and yellow-flowered varieties. Native to India and naturalized in the
tropics of both hemispheres.

~D. inoxia~ Mill. A low-growing, spreading perennial with hairy 2- to
4-inch leaves. The flowers are white, 6 to 7 inches long, ten-lobed. The
fruit is spiny, 2 inches or more in diameter. Native to Mexico and the
Southwest. Similar to ~D. meteloides~. The seeds take up to several weeks
to germinate. Cultivated as an annual in the North.

~D. meteloides~ DC. An erect perennial herb with 2- to 5-inch leaves. The
flowers are white, 8 inches long, often tinged with rose or violet,
fragrant. The capsule is intensely spiny, 2 inches in diameter. Native to
the Southwest and Mexico. The seeds take 3 to 5 weeks to sprout and should
be started in damp peat moss. Do not pre-soak the seeds. Plants should be
spaced 3 to 4 feet apart. Cultivated as an annual in the North.

~D. stramonium~ L. ``Jimson weed.'' A green-stemmed, hairless annual, 2 to
4 feet tall, with few branches and two 8-inch-long ovate leaves. The
flowers are white, 4 inches long. The capsule is egg-shaped, to 2 inches
long, filled with many black seeds. In ~D. Stramonium~ var. ~tatula~ the
flower is violet-purple or lavender; the stems are purple. Naturalized
throughout the world. They are easily grown from seeds, which sprout
quickly even without bottom heat. Does well in rich soil in a dry, sunny
location. May be sown in the open in May in mounds 18 inches apart with
four seeds in each mound. Thin out all but the healthiest plant after
sprouting.

~D. chlorantha~ Hook. A hairless, perennial shrub, occasionally reaching 10
feet tall, with almost triangular, wavy-margined leaves. The flowers are
yellow, drooping, followed by a prickly capsule. This is not a true tree
datura although it occasionally reaches similar heights. Generally grown as
a tall annual.

Cultivation and Propagation: The herbaceous daturas are generally grown
from seeds in early spring. They should be started in flats indoors in the
North, or where they are to stand in warmer areas. The perennial kinds
usually rise from thick tuberous roots. In the North these may be dug in
autumn and stored in semi-dry peat moss, sawdust, or sand in a cool place
until spring. These daturas generally prefer loose, sandy soils, somewhat
on the dry side, and a sunny location. Those native to the Southwest will
stand considerable drought.

Harvesting: The leaves and tops are preferably harvested when the plants
are in full bloom, but they may be gathered at any time from the appearance
of flowers until frost. They should be stripped from the stem and dried as
quickly as possible. Fresh leaves have a fetid odor, which is lost on
drying. Seeds harvested for psychoactive purposes are collected by removing
the capsules when they are ripe, but are still green and unopened. These
are dried in the sun or by low heat. Seeds for growing purposes should be
gathered by collecting capsules that are just opening, removing the seeds
and drying in the sun.

Tree Daturas

~Datura arborea~ L. A small tree, growing to 10 feet tall with 8-inch-long
soft hairy leaves in pairs. The margins are smooth and never wavy. The
flowers are musky-scented, white, veined with green, 6 to 9 inches long,
and hanging. The calyx splits down one side. The fruit is spineless, 2.5
inches long. Native to Peru and Chile. May be distinguished from ~D.
candida~ by the length of the flowers and leaves.

~D. candida~ (Pers.) Pasq. A small tree growing 10 to 12 feet tall with
16-inch-long, ovate, downy leaves. The flowers are white, musky-scented,
hanging, and about 10 inches long. The calyx splits down one side. The
fruit is smooth, 2.5 inches long. Native to tropical America. May be
distinguished from ~D. arborea~ by the extreme length of the leaves and
from ~D. suaveolens~ by the calyx and the leaves. Cuttings root slowly.

~D. suaveolens~ Humb. & Bonpl. A small tree, 10 to 15 feet high, with ovate
6- to 12-inch-long leaves, only slightly hairy. The flowers are
white-nerved with green, hanging, 9 to 12 inches long. The calyx is
inflated, with five obscure teeth. The fruit is smooth, spindle-shaped, 5
inches long. Native to Brazil. May be distinguished from ~D. arborea~ and
~D. candida~ by the five-toothed calyx.

~D. sanguinea~ Kuiz. & Par. ``Huanto.'' A small tree, 4 to 12 feet tall,
with 7-inch-long ovate leaves, shining green on the upper side. The flowers
are 8 to 10 inches long, drooping, brilliant orange-red with yellow veins,
not fragrant. The fruit is top-shaped, spineless, 3.5 inches long. Native
to Peru. Distinguished from all others by the red flowers. Rare; cuttings
are almost impossible to take. Prefers cool areas.

Cultivation and Propagation: The tree daturas may be grown outdoors in
California and the South or as tub plants in the North. They may be
propagated by seed when available. Bottom heat greatly speeds up
germination. Young plants should be watered frequently until tub-plant
size. They need a rich, well-drained soil and a large tub. A large
root-system is required for good bloom. In the summer they should be
watered once a week with liquid fertilizer. In cold-winter areas, tub
plants may be kept outdoors in summer and wintered-over in a cellar or
similar place, as they require little moisture and light while dormant.
When planted outdoors they should be sheltered from wind. Except for ~D.
sanguinea~, they may also be propagated by cuttings taken with heels, which
root easily in water. ~D. sanguinea~ is the hardiest of the four.

Harvesting: The leaves may be harvested at any time, but you should leave
enough for good growth. Most rarely set seed; when they do, the capsules
should be gathered when ripe, and the seeds dried in the sun.



DON~ANA
~Coryphantha macromeris~ (Engl.) Lem.;
Cactus family (Cactaceae)

A low cylindrical cactus to 8 inches tall, branching at the base, covered
with several inch-long, soft, spine-tipped tubercles. The flowers are
purple, 5 inches across. Native to Mexico and West Texas.

Cultivation and Propagation: Don~ana may be grown outdoors in the West and
South or as a pot plant in the North. It may be cultivated in the same
manner as San Pedro except that it is thinner-skinned and more subject to
mealy-bugs and scale insects. Don~ana also makes small offsets at the end
of the lower tubercles. When these reach the size of a nickel they may be
removed and rooted.

Harvesting: Always leave a part of the plant with several tubercles intact
so that it may grow new plants. To reduce bulk, cactus material may be
sliced thinly, and dried quickly in the sun or at a low heat.



FENNEL
~Foeniculum vulgare~ Mill;
Carrot family (Umbelliferae)

A perennial herb growing to 5 feet high, with blue-green stems and leaves.
The leaves are finely divided into threadlike leaflets. The flower cluster
is a large umbel, composed of fifteen to twenty yellow flowers. Native of
southern Europe; naturalized in western U.S.

Cultivation and Propagation: Fennel is grown as an annual or biennial in
cold-winter areas. Grow in a light, well-drained soil in full sun. The seed
should be sown in early spring where the plants are to stand, and the
seedlings thinned to 1 foot apart.

Harvesting: The ripe seeds are the source of the psychotropic oil. These
should be gathered when they are dry and have turned a yellowish-brown
color. The young leaves may be used in salads and fish dishes. Older leaves
are fragrant but tough.



HAWAIIAN BABY WOODROSE
~Argyreia nevosa~ Bojer.;
Morning Glory family (Convolvulaceae)

A large perennial climbing vine with heart-shaped leaves up to 1 foot
across, backed with silvery hairs. The flowers are 2 to 3 inches long,
rose-colored, on 6-inch stalks. Pods dry to a smooth, dark brown,
filbert-sized capsule containing one to four furry brown seeds. The capsule
is surrounded by a dry calyx divided into five petallike sections. Native
to Asia; naturalized and cultivated in Hawaii.

Cultivation and Propagation: It may be grown outdoors in southern
California and Florida. Elsewhere it should be grown in a large pot or tub
outdoors in the summer, brought indoors in winter. It may be propagated by
cuttings or seeds, and in the spring by division. The seed may be sprouted
by making a small nick in the seedcoat away from the germ eye. Soak the
seed until it swells. Plant 0.5-inch deep in loose rich soil. Do not use
bottom heat. After the cotyledons appear, water sparingly, letting the soil
surface dry out to a depth of 0.5-inch. Over-watering causes stem and root
rot. The plant grows slowly until it develops a half-dozen leaves; after
this it grows quickly. In its first year this plant grows into a small bush
1 to 2 feet tall. During this time it may be grown in a large pot and kept
indoors in winter. The next spring it will grow into a very large vine and
should produce flowers and seeds. In this second year it should be planted
out, or grown in a tub. In cold-winter areas the roots should be lifted and
stored or the tub kept in a cool place until spring.

The methods of increasing the alkaloid content of morning glories (see
``Morning Glory'') may be applied to this vine.

Harvesting: The seed pods should be harvested when thoroughly dry. They
should be stored in a cool, dry place. Their potency may begin to decrease
after 6 to 9 months.



HAWAIIAN WOODROSE
~Merremia tuberosa~;
Morning Glory family (Convolvulaceae)

A slender perennial vine with leaves divided into five to seven narrow
lobes. The flowers are yellow, followed by a smooth round capsule,
surrounded by five petallike sepals. Native to Asia; naturalized and
cultivated in Hawaii.

Cultivation and Propagation: The large woodrose may be grown outdoors in
southern California and the South. The seed of the large woodrose must be
nicked well before it will grow. Cut a nick in the seedcoat with a hacksaw,
or cut the small end of the seed off. Soak for 24 hours or until it swells.
Then place the seed in a bowl or cup of damp peat moss, cover it with
plastic wrap, and put it over the pilot light of your stove, or anywhere
that maintains a temperature of 80 degrees fahrenheit or more. Ordinary
bottom heat usually isn't warm enough. Check every few days until it
sprouts in 3 to 10 days. Once sprouted, plant in a 3- to 4-inch pot if
grown indoors, or start seed in May if to be grown outdoors. Place the pot
in a large sunny window and give the vine something to twine around. I have
seen these vines grow one foot or more per week. It is very easy to grow
after sprouting. It can take little or much watering and much abuse. The
vine will flower the second and subsequent years.

Harvesting: The pods may be harvested when they are thoroughly dry. Its
storage properties are the same as those of the baby woodrose.



HELIOTROPE
~Valeriana officinalis~ L.;
Valerian family (Valerianaceae)

Perennial herb 2 to 5 feet high with pinnately divided leaves and clusters
of small, whitish, pinkish, or lavender flowers. Very fragrant. Native of
Europe and N. Asia; naturalized in North America.

Cultivation and Propagation: It is easily grown from seed sown 1/16-inch
deep in light, sandy soil. It may be propagated by division of the
rootstock in spring. It spreads itself rapidly by suckers rising from the
roots.

Harvesting: Flowering tops should be cut off to make the roots develop
more. In September or October the tops should be cut completely and the
large root crowns dug, washed, and dried.



HENBANE
~Hyoscyamus niger~ L.;
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

An annual or biennial herb, to 2.5 feet high, with hairy, 3- to 8-inch-long
leaves. The flowers are 1 inch across, greenish-yellow with purple veins;
they grow in spikes from June to September. The seed capsule is filled with
many pitted seeds. Naturalized infrequently across southern Canada and the
northern U.S.

Cultivation and Propagation: Henbane does well in most soils, as it is
found wild in dry waste places. It is propagated easily by seed. Henbane
seed is very viable. I have sprouted seeds collected from a capsule on a
plant that had gone through a winter's rain and hard frost and had almost
deteriorated away, and got 90 percent germination. The seed should be
planted in May or when the weather is in the 70's. It should be sown very
thinly in rows 2 to 3 feet apart. The bed should be kept moist until
sprouting, and the seedlings should be thinned to 1.5 to 2 feet apart in
the row. They may also be sown in flats at room temperature and
transplanted out on a cool day. Henbane is sometimes attacked by potato
pests and will occasionally mildew like tomato plants.

Harvesting: Henbane leaves and tops should be collected when the plant is
in full flower. This is usually in June, July, or sometimes August. The
leaves should be dried quickly in the sun, as it will lose its properties
if kept in a damp state too long. The herb will lose approximately 80
percent of its weight in drying. Fresh henbane leaves have a fetid order
when handled, which they lose upon drying. The seed is up to ten times as
strong as the leaves. The capsules may be gathered in August, before they
open. The seeds are shaken out and dried in the sun if to be used for
growing purposes, or dried quickly at a low heat if to be used
psychoactively.



HOPS
~Humulus lupulus~ L.;
Hemp family (Cannabinaceae)

A perennial twining vine growing from 15 to 30 feet long with oval 3- to
five-lobed leaves having coarsely-toothed edges. Male and female flowers
occur on separate plants. Native to Eurasia.

Cultivation and Propagation:

Seed Propagation: Hops seed is the type of seed with a dormant embryo, as
many tree and wild plant seeds have. Many people's failure to sprout hops
seed is due not to the unviability of the seed, but to the fact that they
have taken no steps to break the dormancy of the embryo before sowing.

To break this dormancy, first place your seeds in a glass of water. You
will notice that most of the seeds will float and a few will sink. The
seeds which float are viable and should be skimmed off and placed in
another container of water. The material which sinks should be discarded,
as it consists of broken seeds, dead material, and other debris. Soak the
floating seeds for 24 to 40 hours. During this time many of the seeds will
sink. Take all of the seeds and mix them with damp peat moss in a plastic
sandwich bag. Close and seal it and place it in your refrigerator for 5 to
6 weeks. At the end of this time take the bag out and keep it at room
temperature. The peat moss may be placed in a shallow container covered
with plastic wrap. Sift through the peat moss seed mixture every day,
looking for sprouted seed. Do not let the peat moss dry out. The seeds can
germinate each day for 10 to 21 days. A few may sprout as late as 4 weeks.
The sprouts should be removed and planted root down in loose, rich,
well-drained soil. From germination until a few true leaves form, hops
sprouts are very sensitive to overwatering. Keep the soil slightly on the
dry side. While the peat moss is in the refrigerator and afterwards, you
may notice some white mold forming. Don't worry about this. It only feeds
on dead matter, not on viable seeds. When storing seeds, keep from moisture
and heat, as these destroy viability. I know of only one source of viable
hops seeds: the Redwood City Seed Company (see Sources). The above method
of germination was developed by this company and has been reprinted by its
kind permission.

Rhizome Cultivation: Hops are propagated worldwide by rhizomes, but are
rarely available to the general public as a result of the U.S. federal
government's attempts to stop their possible abuse as material grafted onto
marijuana stocks. However, they are still available from Wine and the
People (see Sources). Propagating hops by rhizomes has the advantage over
seeds in that they will sprout sooner after planting if the weather is
warm. However, they have serious disadvantages. Propagation by cuttings for
too long limits the genetic bank of the plant. Thus the plant eventually
ceases to produce seed and comes to an evolutionary dead end, because
without seed natural mutations cannot occur. The plant then becomes totally
dependent on man for its survival. All of the hops grown commercially in
this country are seedless hybrids (all polyploid hops are sterile). Hybrid
plants are often more susceptible to disease, although more vigorous
growing than ordinary plants. Molds, viruses and insects that attack hops
plants continue to mutate and evolve stronger strains freely, while
seedless hops are not able to mutate resistant strains, thus decreasing the
survival potential of the hybrid. With the standardization of the
beer-making industry across the world, the last remaining areas that grow
seeded hops are rapidly being forced to grow only seedless hybrids. If you
wish to use roots, the cuttings should be planted horizontally with the
buds upwards, 2 inches deep in a well-worked, rich loamy soil. Hops may
also be propagated by layering. The lower part of the vine is laid on the
ground and covered with soil. This will root and may be used for cuttings
in winter. Hops is also propagated by cuttings of the shoots and branches.
Each hops plant should be given a space 18 feet tall to climb.

Harvesting: When harvesting hops that has been grafted to hemp, the whole
plant may be used. The cones should be harvested when ripe in late July or
early August. They should be dried quickly, soon after harvesting, in the
sun or in the oven at a low heat (140 to 160 degrees fahrenheit). If this
is not done they will deteriorate rapidly after picking. When harvesting
hops that have been grafted to cannabis, both cones and leaves may be used.
The same drying rules apply to these.



HYDRANGEA
~Hydrangea paniculata~ Sieb. var. ~grandiflora~;
Saxifrage family (Saxifragaceae)

This is the commonest hardy hydrangea in cultivation. It is a treelike
shrub 8 to 30 feet high, with 3- to 5-inch-long oval leaves. The flowers
are whitish, in dense clusters 8 to 15 inches long. The flowers sometimes
change to pink and purple with age. Native to China and Japan. A common
garden plant in the U.S.

Cultivation and Propagation:  Hardy everywhere except north central U.S.
(Montana, North Dakota, and Minnesota), but can be grown in sheltered
places there. Hydrangeas bloom best in full sun, but will do well in
partial shade.

They are best propagated by cuttings of green growth in June. The cuttings
should be the ends of nonflowering shoots and should have two to three
pairs of leaves. The bottom pair of leaves should be removed and the stem
cut just below a joint. They should be placed in moist sand in a shady
place.

Seeds are uncommon but when available should be sown in a sandy, peaty soil
in spring in a greenhouse or sheltered place.

Hydrangeas can be transplanted easily. The color of the blossoms may be
altered by the addition of certain minerals to the soil. Special solutions
for this purpose are available at many nurseries.

Harvesting: Leaves can be harvested at any time. A single small bush will
provide large quantities of leaves and flowers when pruned in the fall.



IOCHROMA
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

Iochroma is a genus of tropical shrubs or small trees with tubular flowers,
several species of which are cultivated in the U.S.

~Iochroma coccineum~ Schow. A shrub with hairy branches and oblong leaves.
The flowers are 2 inches long, scarlet, and in drooping clusters. Native to
Central America.

~I. fuchsioides~ Miers. A shrub with narrow, almost hairless leaves, and
1.5-inch long orange-scarlet flowers in drooping clusters. Native to Peru.

~I. lanceolatum~ Miers. A shrub growing to 8 feet tall with hairy, ovate to
narrow leaves. The flowers are 2 inches long, purple-blue. Native to
Ecuador.

~I. tubulosum~ Benth. A hairy shrub, 6 to 8 feet high, with ovate leaves
and deep blue 1.5-inch-long flowers in drooping clusters. Native to
Colombia.

Cultivation and Propagation: Iochroma may be grown outdoors in California
and the South, but must be grown indoors in the North. Propagated by seeds
when available; or by cuttings, preferably taken in February or early
March. Cuttings take several weeks to root.

Harvesting: Leaves may be picked and dried any time there is sufficient
growth to replace them. Harvesting should be stopped in the winter when
growth is slow or halted. Flowers may be dried as they begin to wilt.



KAVA KAVA
~Piper methysticum~ Forst.;
Pepper family (Piperaceae)

A perennial, soft-wooded shrub growing 8 to 10 feet tall, with 8-inch ovate
to heart-shaped leaves. The flower spikes are opposite the leaves; male and
female flowers occur on separate plants. Native to the Pacific Islands.

Cultivation and Propagation: In the Pacific Islands kava does best in the
cool, moist highlands up to 1000 feet above sea level where the daytime
summer temperatures are between 80 and 90 degrees fahrenheit. It may be
grown in southern Florida, but elsewhere it requires greenhouse
temperatures. It prefers a loose, rich soil with good drainage and frequent
watering. It does well on stony ground. The best crops are grown on virgin
soil. If two consecutive crops are raised on the same soil the second crop
will be poor. The plant rarely produces seeds and is generally propagated
by cuttings of the firm wood. These are susceptible to fungus diseases
because of the high humidity the plant requires. Plants should be spaced
about 6 feet apart either way. This furnishes about 1200 plants per acre.
Kava makes a good house plant.

Harvesting: The main rootstock begins just below the surface of the ground
and continues for 2 feet or more. It gets to be 3 to 5 inches thick after
2.5 to 4 years growth, and may weigh 12 to 16 lb. From it radiate many
tough roots. Rootstocks usually reach maximum growth at about 6 years, but
the older the plant the more potent it will be. These may be dug and used
fresh or dried in the sun. The lower stems are also active. Before drying,
the rootstocks and lower stems should be scraped of their outer coating and
cut into pieces weighing 0.5 to 1.5 oz. each. Drying reduces weight to
about 1/5. The tough radiating roots may be dug and used fresh at any time
but the plant should be given time to generate new roots.

For further information on the botany, chemistry, history and uses of kava
see ``Kava Kava: The Famous Drug Plant of the South Sea Islands'', by Dr.
E. F. Steinmetz, also published by the Twentieth Century Alchemist.



KHAT
~Catha edulis~ Forsk.;
Burning Bush family (Celastreae)

An evergreen shrub or tree to 10 feet tall, with oval, 4-inch-long leaves.
The flowers are small, white, and five-petaled. The fruit is an oblong
three-angled capsule containing one to three seeds. Native from Abyssinia
to South Africa.

Cultivation and Propagation: Khat may be grown outdoors in Florida and
California, and as a greenhouse plant in the North. It needs fast drainage
and does poorly in a rich moist soil. Does best in hot areas in poor dry
soil. Propagated by cuttings taken in spring or, more effectively, by
layering. Khat rarely sets seed in this country. It should be pinched or
pruned to keep it compact, and to produce more buds.

Harvesting: The buds, branch tips and young leaves from pruning may be used
fresh or dried. Do not harvest too often or cut the branch tips too far
back, as this may destroy active buds and destroy new growth.



LION'S TAIL
~Leonotis leonurus~ R. Br.;
Mint family (Labiatae)

A shrubby, branching perennial 3 to 6 feet high with 2- to 5-inch-long
hairy-toothed leaves. The tubular flowers are 2 inches long, bright red,
yellow, or orange-red, and bloom in late spring and autumn. Native to
Africa.

Cultivation and Propagation: ~Leonotis~ may be planted outdoors in
California and the South; it may be grown as an annual in the North, or
brought into the greenhouse during winter. It should be planted in full
sun, as it will not flower in the shade. It prefers a dry soil and is
drought-resistant. Water deeply and infrequently.

~Leonotis~ may be propagated by seeds sown indoors from January to
February. Cuttings root easily at any time of the year. For good-sized
plants, cuttings should be taken in the early spring.

Harvesting: The leaves and flowers are smoked for their cannabis-like
effects. These parts may be gathered at any time and dried quickly. Harvest
no more than one-third of the leaves at one time. Let the plant grow and
fill out for at least a month before harvesting again. In Africa a resin is
gathered from the leaves. Plants grown in less torrid climates do not tend
to exude this resin. Such leaves can be smoked, however, or subjected to
alcohol extraction.



LOBELIA
~Lobelia inflata~ L.;
Lobelia family (Lobeliaceae)

An herbaceous annual growing to 3 feet high with hairy, ovate leaves. The
flowers are 0.25-inch long, light blue or whitish, followed by an inflated
seed capsule. Native from Labrador south to Georgia and Arkansas.

Cultivation and Propagation: Lobelia is best propagated from seed sown in
January or early February in flats of fine soil. The seeds are very small,
and difficult to sow thinly enough. They may be mixed with fine sand or
with herbal (nonviable) seed. The seedlings should be transplanted to pots
when large enough to handle, and set outdoors in early June. It will do
well in ordinary garden soil if given a cool, shady location. In hot areas
it will stop flowering in midsummer. Plants may be lifted in fall, kept
over winter, and new plants started from cuttings of these taken in January
or February.

Harvesting: The leaves and tops should be harvested in August and
September. The seeds are the most potent part of the plant. These should be
gathered when the capsules ripen.



MADAGASCAR PERIWINKLE
~Catharanthus rosea~ Don.;
Dogbane family (Apocynaceae)

Formerly ~Vinca rosea~. A tender erect perennial with oblong leaves,
growing to 2 feet tall. It is ever-blooming. The flowers are rosy purple or
white, 1.5 inches across. Origin unknown; now naturalized in the tropics of
every continent.

Cultivation and Propagation: Madagascar periwinkle may be grown as a tender
perennial in California and Florida or cultivated as an annual elsewhere.
The seed should be sown thinly from January to March in flats of sandy soil
and kept at a temperature of 65 to 70 degrees fahrenheit. When the
seedlings show the second leaf they should be thinned out to a distance of
about 1 inch apart. When they have five or six leaves they should be potted
in 2-inch pots. When all danger of frost is over, they may be set out a
foot apart each way.

~Catharanthus~ prefers a light sandy loam, and will not do well in a very
heavy soil. When watering, the soil should be well soaked and then left
alone for several days. It does well in semi-shady situations.

A few plants may be lifted in the fall and carried over winter in pots.
Cuttings from these may be used for propagation.

Harvesting: Leaves and flowers may be gathered any time after the plant
begins to flower. In fall the plants should be cut off at the ground and
dried quickly, before cold weather starts them wilting.



MANDRAGORE; MANDRAKE
~Mandragora officinarum~ L.;
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

A stemless herbaceous perennial with ovate foot-long leaves rising directly
from the root. The flowers are 1 inch long, purple or greenish yellow,
followed by an oblong greenish berry. Native of southern Europe.

Cultivation and Propagation: The mandragore is hardy throughout the U.S. It
likes a light, deep soil, as the roots run far down. They will do poorly in
a soil that is chalky or excessively gravelly. If the soil is too wet in
winter, the roots will rot. It is propagated from seeds which should be
sown in deep flats or, better, singly in pots. These should be kept
well-watered and when they reach a good size they should be carefully set
out at least 2 feet apart.

Harvesting: The roots should be dug after the second or third year. If left
in the ground they will grow to a great age, and will have large branching
roots up to four feet long.

Note: Do not confuse this Old World mandrake with the American mandrake
(~Podophyllum peltatum~) whose roots are sold by many herb companies under
the name ``Mandrake roots.'' These roots are a powerful cathartic poison.
The plants are unmistakably different.



MARABA
~Kaempferia galanga~ L.;
Ginger family (Zingiberaceae)

A stemless perennial herb with 6-inch-long leaves rising directly from the
rootstock. The flowers are white with a violet spot. Native to New Guinea.

Cultivation and Propagation: ~Kaempferia~ will not endure frost. It may be
grown in the open in the South if well protected. In the rest of the
country it should be grown indoors in a large pot of rich soil. Once the
roots have developed it should be given plenty of water. The pots may be
kept in water half their depth. It should be fed occasionally with liquid
fertilizer. Towards the end of summer the amount of water should be
gradually lessened. The roots should be kept almost dry during winter. In
the spring the roots may be divided to form new plants.

Harvesting: In spring, when dividing the roots, some of them may be split
open and dried quickly without heat, or used fresh.



MATE'
~Ilex paraguayensis~ St. Hil.;
Holly family (Aquifoliaceae)

An evergreen shrub or small tree growing to 20 feet tall, with oval,
wavy-toothed leaves. The Flowers are tiny and white, followed by red or
reddish-brown berries. Native to Brazil.

Cultivation and Propagation: This ~ilex~ will do well in a rich,
well-drained soil. It grows very rapidly and can produce a crop after one
year's growth from seed. The seed, however, must be stratified, as it does
not germinated until the second year. Seedlings should be transplanted in
early fall or in the spring, before new growth starts. Some of the leaves
should be stripped off first to lessen the shock. It may also be propagated
by cuttings under glass.

Harvesting: The branch tips bearing young leaves should be cut when the
growth is new. These should be lightly toasted in an oven until dry, and
the twigs removed and discarded.



MESCAL BEANS
~Sophora secundiflora~ (Orteg) Lag.;
Bean family (Leguminosae)

A small tree reaching 35 feet with age, with 4- to 6-inch leaves divided
into seven to nine leaflets. The flowers are violet-blue, very fragrant,
and occur in clusters up to 8 inches long; they bloom from February to
April. The pod is furry and contains up to eight red seeds. Native to Texas
and New Mexico.

Cultivation and Propagation: It can be grown outside in California and the
South, or may be grown as a tub plan in the North, and brought inside
during the cold months. It grows slowly in cool-summer regions. It thrives
in hot sun and well-drained, alkaline soil. The soil should be kept on the
dryish side except when blooming. It is propagated from seeds, which should
be nicked and soaked, or from greenwood cuttings and layers.

Harvesting: In the fall the pods will open, exposing the seeds, which
should be removed and stored immediately, before children can get to them.



MORMON TEA
~Ephedra nevadensis~ Wats.;
Gnetum family (Gnetaceae)

An erect, broom-like shrub 2 feet high. The leafless stems are pale green
when young and olive brown with age. Male and female flowers are found on
separate plants. The seeds are a smooth brown color and paired, Common on
slopes and hills, mostly below 4500 feet elevation. Native to the Mohave
and Colorado deserts, east to Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico.

Cultivation and Propagation: ~Ephedra~ should be planted in dry locations.
It thrives in ordinary loamy soil and does very well in a loose rocky soil
with full sun and little water. It is most often propagated by division of
the clumps in spring, and seeds sown in a light sandy soil in early spring.
It may also be propagated by layers and suckers. It makes an excellent
ground cover on rocky slopes.

Harvesting: The tops of the branches may be picked and dried at any time as
long as the plant is not denuded or the branches cut back past the viable
buds.



MORNING GLORY
~Ipomoea~ sp.;
Morning Glory family (Convolvulaceae)

This species is often called ~I. violacea~, but it is my contention that it
is properly ~I. tricolor~. It is a perennial twining vine, growing from 10
to 20 feet high, with heart-shaped leaves to 5 inches long. The flowers are
funnel-shaped, purplish blue with a white tube. Native to tropical America.
Psychoactive varieties are Heavenly Blue, Pearly Gates, Flying Saucers,
Wedding Bells, Blue Star, and Summer Skies.

Cultivation and Propagation: Although this species is a perennial it is
usually cultivated as an annual in this country. Morning glories thrive in
a strong, well-drained soil in a sunny site with plenty of water, but they
will do well almost anywhere. The seeds have a hard seedcoat and should be
nicked or soaked two hours in warm water before sowing. If the seeds are
nicked and soaked, the vines will generally flower 6 weeks after sowing.
The seeds should be planted 0.25 to 0.5 inch deep and not less than 6
inches apart. This species tends to run to vine unless the roots are
cramped. This may be done by standing the vines in pots and allowing them
to become slightly potbound before setting them out. Although morning
glories like a lot of water, if the roots are kept damp constantly, the
vines will produce few flowers and they will set very little seed. Various
methods have been devised to increase the alkaloid content of the seeds by
altering the soil chemistry and using hormones. An interesting account of
these methods is found in the book ~Home Grown Highs~ by Mary Jane
Superweed.

Harvesting: The seeds may be gathered as the pods become brown and dry.
Immature seeds are more bitter than ripe ones. It has been reported that
immature seeds contain more alkaloids, but this has not been confirmed.
There are approximately 850 seeds per ounce of the Heavenly Blue variety.
The stem and leaves contain some alkaloid. However, because they contain
purgative principles, this part of the plant is used only in extraction. If
used, pick fresh and dry quickly without heat.

Note: Some suppliers coat their seeds with toxins either as a fungicide or
to discourage their use as hallucinogens. The symptoms of ingesting treated
seeds are vomiting and diarrhea. Some people experience nausea from
ingesting untreated seeds and fear they have taken treated seeds. However,
if the company has treated their seeds, they must say so on the package. To
test your susceptibility to nausea, chew 50 to 100 seeds or less the first
time.



NUTMEG
~Myristica fragrans~ Houtt.;
Nutmeg family (Myristicaceae)

A tree growing to 70 feet tall with oblong, brownish, 5-inch leaves. The
flowers are small, with male and female borne on separate trees. The fruit
is reddish to yellowish, splitting into two valves. The brown seed (nutmeg)
is surrounded by a scarlet aril (mace). Native to the East Indies;
cultivated in the West Indies and South America.

Cultivation and Propagation: The nutmeg tree thrives in a hot, moist
climate, in a well-drained soil with partial shade. It may be grown
outdoors in southern Florida. Elsewhere it should be planted in a
greenhouse with relatively high humidity. It requires a moist soil, but
should not be kept wet, as the roots will rot. To obtain nutmegs both sexes
should be planted. One male is sufficient to pollinate ten to twelve
females. When grown from seed, they should be planted singly in pots, and
transplanted when 8 to 10 inches high. The trees will begin to bear in 7 to
9 years.

Harvesting: The seeds are collected when the fruit splits. The scarlet aril
is separated and dried in the sun to become mace. The seed is dried in the
sun for two months, being turned every few days until the kernel rattles
within the shell, which is then cracked and removed.



OLOLUIQUE
~Rivea corymbosa~ Hall.;
Morning Glory family (Convolvulaceae)

A slender perennial vine, woody at the base, with 4-inch-long heart-shaped
leaves. The flowers are white, in large clusters, 1.5 inches wide. The
fruit is a one-seeded capsule. Native to tropical America.

Cultivation and Propagation: Cultivate much like the morning glory (which
see) except that it is less hardy and should be started indoors in the
North. It will also take more water than the common morning glory and, as
it is somewhat woody, it can be cut back and brought indoors to carry it
over the winter in the North.

Harvesting: The seeds should be gathered as the pods turn brown and dry.



PASSIONFLOWER
~Passiflora incarnata~ L.;
Passionflower family (Passifloraceae)

A strong perennial vine becoming 20 to 30 feet long. The leaves are
three-lobed and deeply toothed. Its flowers are about 2 inches across,
white with a purple or pink band around the center. The fruit is yellow
when ripe, 1.5 to 2 inches long, edible. Native from Virginia south and
west to Florida and Texas.

Cultivation and Propagation: This is the hardiest passionflower. If the
roots are protected it will survive as far north as the Pennsylvania
border. It prefers a light, rich soil, and does well in dry areas.
~Passiflora~ grows readily from the seed, but takes several weeks to
sprout. It is best sown on the surface of light soil or peat moss with
bottom heat. The young plants may be planted in the open after 6 months. It
may be propagated easily by cuttings of half-ripened growth. These should
be about 6 inches long; they will root easily in sand and do not require
bottom heat. The vines may eventually overgrow and tangle themselves. Thin
them out by cutting branches back to their beginnings. Passionflower dies
back at the first frost.

Harvesting: The leaves, stems and flowers may be harvested at any time.
This is a good way to keep the plant from crowding itself. Each year before
the frost kills it, the entire vine may be cut back to the ground, yielding
great quantities of herb. It may be dried in the sun or at a low heat.



PIPILTZINTZINTLI
~Salvia divinorum~ Epling & Jativa;
Mint family (Labiatae)

A woody perennial herb 4 to 6 feet tall with square, hollow stems. The
leaves are dark green, 6 to 8 inches long, with toothed edges. The flowers
are blue or white on spikes. Only found cultivated by sorcerers in an
isolated area in southern Mexico.

Cultivation and Propagation: It is propagated in much the same manner as
coleus. It needs a loose, rich soil. It is best grown as a tub plant and
brought indoors when the weather begins to cool. It may be grown outdoors
in frost-free areas. This ~salvia~ is generally grown from cuttings, but I
know of one instance in which it was grown from seed. The seed should be
germinated in the same way as coleus. Cuttings should be taken in spring,
after the plant has had a lot of sun. Cut 0.5-inch below a node and root in
no more than an inch of water. A pinch of rootone may be added to the water
and shaken well to dissolve it. This will help prevent stem rot and will
stimulate rooting. When the roots are 0.25-inch long the cutting should be
potted. Longer roots may be damaged. Plant in a 2-inch pot with good
potting soil. Grows rapidly after the roots are established. I have found
that this plant is susceptible to stem rot if over-watered. It is often
attacked by aphids, white flies, spider mites and mealy-bugs.

Harvesting: Harvesting the leaves for use as a hallucinogen should not be
attempted until one has at least four one-year-old plants. An equal number
of leaves should be harvested from each plant so that the shock to one
plant will not be great. Dosage may vary; begin with ten to twenty fresh
leaves. Fresh leaves are used, as the active principle is believed to be
unstable. Considering the rarity of the plants the leaves should be chewed,
because when the juices are expressed much of the active principle is
wasted.



PSILOCYBE MUSHROOMS
Agaric family (Agaricaceae)

Many species of mushrooms that contain psilocybin grow wild throughout the
American continents, Europe, and parts of Asia and Africa. This book
doesn't have the space to provide information on the collection and
cultivation of these mushrooms. Cultivation is difficult and collection can
be risky if one is not experienced in mycology. The reader who wishes to
collect these mushrooms is referred to ~Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's
Guide~, from And/Or Press. Information on high-yield cultivation of these
mushrooms may be found in Home Grown Highs by Mary Jane Superweed. See the
end of this book for suppliers of these books.



RHYNCHOSIA
~Rhynchosia phaseoloides~ DC;
Bean family (Leguminosae)

A high-climbing, perennial, twining vine with oval, pointed leaves in
groups of three. The flowers are reddish-yellow and grow in racemes. The
pod contains two scarlet seeds with a black end. Native to Central America.

Cultivation and Propagation: ~Rhynchosia~ may be grown outdoors in
California and the South. It is propagated from the seed, which should be
nicked and sown in damp peat moss with bottom heat. I have found that the
seeds should not be soaked before sowing as this tends to rot them. After
sprouting, transplant into a rich, well-drained soil in a 2-inch pot. When
the temperature outdoors is in the 70s, it may be planted out. In the
North, it should be cut back and brought indoors for the winter.

Harvesting: The seeds should be harvested when the pods begin to open.

Note, ~Rhynchosia~ seed closely resembles the seed of ~Abrus precatorius~,
the rosary-pea. ~Abrus~ seed is one of the most poisonous
naturally-occurring substances known to man. Less than one ~Abrus~ seed,
weighing a tenth of a gram, is fatal. However, ~Abrus~ seed is easily told
from ~Rhynchosia~ seed by the position of the hilum (the small dent where
the seed was attached to the pod). In ~Abrus~ the hilum lies within the
black part of the seed; in ~Rhynchosia~ it lies within the red part of the
seed.

~Abrus~ vines have pinnate leaves with many small leaflets, while
~Rhynchosia~ leaves are larger and in threes. ~Abrus~ flowers are red to
purple, rarely white; ~Rhynchosia~ flowers are reddish-yellow.



SAN PEDRO
~Trichocereus pachanoi~ Brit. & Rose;
Cactus family (Cactaceae)

A tall, columnar cactus growing to 18 feet, with six to eight ribs. The
spines are small, sometimes nonexistent. The flowers are white,
reddish-brown outside, up to 10 inches long, very fragrant, night-blooming.
Native to Ecuador and Peru.

Cultivation and Propagation: San Pedro may be grown outdoors in the West
and South or as a pot plant in the North. It prefers a sandy, well-drained
soil. If potted it should be kept in a clay pot, as this will help the soil
dry quickly and prevent root-rot. San Pedro is most easily propagated by
cuttings. These should be dried for a few days to several weeks, until the
cut surface forms a corky layer. The cutting should then be placed in damp
sand, deep enough to support it. After several weeks, when the cactus
begins to show signs of growth or swelling, it may be potted in ordinary
cactus soil. Seeds are now becoming rare in this country. San Pedro enjoys
full sunlight. Seedlings are more light-sensitive than mature plants. If
they turn a reddish-brown color, place them in partial shade. Potted cacti
should be turned occasionally, to expose all sides to the sun. They are
also very sensitive to natural gas and should never be grown in a kitchen
with a gas stove. One of the main sources of trouble with potted cacti is
over-watering during the dormant months. In winter, the plants' rest
period, they should only be watered enough to keep them from shriveling. In
summer they may be watered often. San Pedro, like most cacti, tend to grow
mostly during spring and summer. During the summer they send their roots
deeper into the soil. At this time rootlets may appear at the base of upper
branches. This is an ideal time to take cuttings.

Harvesting: A piece of the cactus 3 inches in diameter and 3 to 6 inches
long is one dose. To reduce the bulk of the cactus to be eaten, or to store
it, it may be sliced thinly and dried quickly in the sun or in an oven at
150 to 225 degrees fahrenheit. In dry weight the dose should be from 12 to
20 grams. When harvesting, always leave a stump with some areoles (spine
pads) on it in the soil, as new columns will grow out of the areoles.



SASSAFRAS
~Sassafras albidum~;
Laurel family (Lauraceae)

Formerly ~Sassafras officinale~. Usually a small, slender tree, but
sometimes growing 60 to 100 feet tall. The leaves are ovate, 5 inches long,
and sometimes three-lobed. Its flowers are yellow, in 2-inch-long racemes,
followed by a dark blue fruit, on bright red stalks. Native from Maine to
Florida and Texas.

Cultivation and Propagation: Sassafras may be easily grown throughout the
U.S. in almost any soil. It may be propagated by seeds sown as soon as they
are ripe, suckers, and root cuttings. Because of its long taproots, it is
not easily transplanted when old. In the North it prefers a warm sunny
location.

Harvesting: The soil may be cleared away from a portion of the roots and
the root-bark peeled away. The inner bark should not be damaged, so that
the roots can grow new bark. Another method is to harvest the entire root,
as the pith of the root, although weaker, has the same properties as the
bark. With any method the tree should be given time to recover and grow new
roots before harvesting again.



SHANSI
~Coriaria thymifolia~ Humb. & Bonpl.;
Coriaria family (Coriariaceae)

A shrubby, perennial herb growing from 1 to 4 feet high, with frondlike
branches covered with many 1-inch-long leaves. The flowers are very small
and grow in drooping, foot-long racemes. Native to Peru and New Zealand.

Cultivation and Propagation: In the South and West this plant may be grown
in the open. In colder areas it should be planted at the foot of a south or
west wall. In these areas the plant may be killed back to the ground by
severe frosts, but may arise from the roots in spring. Shansi will grow
well in most well-drained soils if given a sunny location. It is propagated
most frequently from seeds sown in early spring, and by greenwood cuttings
taken in midsummer. It may also be propagated by suckers and layers.

Harvesting: When the berries ripen and turn a dark purple they may be
harvested and eaten fresh or dried in the sun for use later.



SILVERVINE
~Actinidia polygama~ (Sieb. & Zucc.) Maxim;
Dillenia family (Dilleniaceae)

A perennial, deciduous, twining shrub. The leaves are ovate, up to 6 inches
long, often variegated with white or pale yellow. The flowers are white,
five-petaled, 0.75-inch across, and occur in June. They are followed by
bitter, yellow, many-seeded berries. Native to Japan and China.

Cultivation and Propagation: This plant prefers a rich moist soil, and
grows well in a sunny or half-shaded location. It is propagated by seeds
which are sown in early spring in pots of sandy soil indoors. It may also
be propagated by cuttings of the semi-woody shoots from the current year's
growth and rooted in light moist soil in a sheltered place. These cuttings
are best taken in July. It can also be propagated by layering the ends of
the trailing branches. Give ample water and sturdy supports when
well-established. Vines can be guided and tied.

Harvesting: The twigs and young leaves are the part generally used, but
older leaves and flowers may also be used. They should be dried as quickly
as possible, preferably out of direct sunlight, and without the application
of heat.



SINICUICHI
Loosestrife family (Lythraceae)

Two species of ~Heimia~ are used as hallucinogens. They are:

~Heimia myrtifolia~ Link. Similar to ~H. salicifolia~, but much smaller,
growing only 3 feet tall. The narrow leaves are 2 inches long, and the
yellow flowers are 1/5 of an inch long. Native of Brazil.

~H. salicifolia~ Link. A perennial herbaceous shrub growing to 10 feet
tall, with narrow 3.5-inch-long leaves. The flowers are yellow, 0.75 inch
long, and are followed by a ribbed capsule. Native from Mexico to
Argentina.

Cultivation and Propagation: These ~Heimias~ can be grown outdoors in
California and the South. Elsewhere they may be grown as tub plants. Both
prefer a well-drained soil, but a good supply of water. ~Heimia~ seeds are
very small, and should be sown very thinly on the surface of fine soil that
has previously been firmed with a brick. When dealing with a small quantity
of seed, it is best to plant them singly, spacing them an inch apart or
more. Do not cover the seed, just press them into the soil with a small
flat object. The flat should be watered only by a fine spray or by
perfusion from the bottom. Keep the flat somewhat shaded and the surface
moist until most of the seeds have germinated. When the first true leaves
show, begin exposing the flat to more sun and let the surface dry between
waterings. If you have sown them too thickly, either thin out to an inch or
so apart or prick them out and space an inch apart in another flat. Be
careful while transplanting, as ~Heimia~ seedlings have very large root
systems in relation to their size. Seedlings less than 0.25-inch tall often
have 2-inch-long roots. When the seedlings are an inch or so tall, pot
singly, or plant them out to their permanent positions. Water thoroughly
but infrequently to encourage deep rooting. ~Heimia~ may also be propagated
by cuttings and layers.

Harvesting: The fresh leaves may be harvested after the plant is
established well enough to replace the leaves.



SO'KSI
~Mirabilis multiflora~ (Torr.) Gray;
Four O'Clock family (Nyctaginaceae)

An herbaceous perennial, 2 to 3 feet tall, with gray-green, somewhat
heart-shaped leaves. The flowers are rose-purple, to 2 inches long, three
to six in each calyx-like involucre. Native to the Southwest; found between
2500 and 5600 feet elevation in Arizona, Utah, Colorado, northern Mexico,
and parts of California.

Cultivation and Propagation: This species may be grown as a perennial in
the South and West. In the North the roots must be lifted and stored over
winter. It prefers a loose, dry, sandy soil but will do well in almost any
garden soil provided it is not too damp. The soil should be deep, as this
favors the production of large, long roots. So'ksi is propagated by seeds.
These are usually sown where the plants are to stand, but they may be sown
individually in small pots and set out as soon as the first pair of leaves
forms. The seeds often take several weeks to sprout, but the seedlings grow
very quickly and form blooming plants in midsummer. The plants should be
spaced 15 to 20 inches apart.

Harvesting: The roots may be dug at any time of the year but are preferably
dug in the fall, just after frost kills the upper part of the plant. If the
roots are left in the ground in the North, they may be destroyed by the
cold. Although the roots are large, thick and branching, they break easily
and cannot be pulled like carrots. They should be dug with a small trowel
or stick, or preferably with the hands. They should be washed thoroughly
and dried in the sun before staring. First-year roots weigh up to a pound
each.

Note: The roots of a similar plant, the common four o'clock (~Mirabilis
jalapa~) are a powerful purgative, and should not be ingested.



SYRIAN RUE
~Peganum harmala~ L.;
Caltrop family (Zygophyllaceae)

A bright green, succulent, perennial herb, becoming woody with age, growing
1 to 2 feet tall. The leaves are 2 inches long and finely divided. The
flowers are white, five-petaled, followed by a two- to four-cavitied
capsule about 3/8 inch in diameter. Native to the deserts of southern Asia
and Africa. Also found wild in some parts of Texas.

Cultivation and Propagation: Syrian rue may be grown outdoors in the South
and West. It does well in dry sandy soils, but will benefit from somewhat
richer soils. Will stand considerable drought. Viable seeds are rare but
are the best means of propagation. These should be sown in flats of half
sand, half soil, in April and May. Water sparingly, letting the surface
dry. The seedlings are very susceptible to overwatering. They should be
grown as pot plants the first year, and brought indoors in the winter. In
the following spring they may be planted outdoors. In cold-winter areas the
roots should be lifted and stored in damp sawdust in a cool place until
early spring. Be sure to plant out before new growth starts.

Harvesting: The seeds should be gathered as the capsules ripen and should
be dried in the sun. The roots may be harvested in autumn, in the same
manner as kava roots, after the tops die from frost. These should be split
and dried in the sun. The stems and foliage are inactive.



TOBACCO
~Nicotiana tabacum~ L.;
Nightshade family (Solanaceae)

An herbaceous annual growing to 6 feet tall, covered with short, sticky
hairs. The leaves are thin, 1 foot or more long. The flowers are rose,
purplish-red, or white, 2 inches long, on stalks. Native to tropical
America. Possibly a hybrid.

Cultivation and Propagation: Tobacco grows best in a rich, sandy loam. It
is easily grown from seed. These should be started in flats of finely
sifted soil indoors in the early spring. Because they are very small they
should be mixed with sand and sown thinly on the surface of the soil, and
lightly pressed in with a small, flat object. The flat should be watered
only with a fine spray or perfusion from the bottom. When the seed has
germinated move the flat to a sunny position. When the seedlings are large
enough to handle they may be transplanted to small pots or moved directly
to the garden if the weather is warm enough. The plants should be set out a
foot apart in rows 3 feet apart. They should have a warm sunny location
with plenty of water when the weather is hot and dry.

Flower buds should be picked off as they appear. This will increase the
size and thickness of the leaves. A plant or two may be allowed to flower,
because they are beautiful.

Tobacco is susceptible to many insect pests, fungi, and viral blights.

Tobacco is one of the worst soil depleters. After each season the soil in
which it has been grown must be heavily fertilized.

Harvesting: The curing of tobacco is an expert business, and will not be
covered here. Furthermore, this process greatly reduces its alkaloid
content. For hallucinogenic purposes, the leaves should be dried quickly,
preferably in the shade or indoors, and without the application of heat.
Uncured tobacco is very potent -- the Indians who used it would often pass
out after as little as one cigarette, and ``communicate with the gods.''
This type of tobacco should be smoked with caution. The danger here is
death from overdose rather than addiction. When used as a ritual narcotic
it is not smoked often enough to result in addiction.



WILD LETTUCE
~Lactuca virosa~ L.;
Sunflower family (Compositae)

A biennial herb growing to 6 feet high. The stem is a smooth, pale green,
sometimes spotted with purple. The lower leaves, rising from the base, are
from 6 to 18 inches long; the stem leaves are much smaller. The stem is
topped by numerous pale yellow flower heads. The seed is black with a tuft
of silvery hair. Native to central and southern Europe. Naturalized in the
U.S.

Cultivation and Propagation: Wild lettuce prefers a rich, loose,
well-drained soil, but can grow almost anywhere if watered frequently. It
is propagated by seeds in the same manner as garden lettuce. They may be
sown very thickly in rows and thinned out to 18 inches apart, or started in
flats in early spring. Flat-grown seedlings should be transplanted very
carefully.

Harvesting: The milky juice of this plant may be harvested by cutting off
the flower heads and collecting the juice that exudes. This may be repeated
several times a day for several weeks by cutting a little off the top each
time. Another method that is much easier but will yield less is extracting
juice from the entire plant in a vegetable juicer and drying it in the sun
or under low heat.



WORMWOOD
~Artemisia absinthium~ L.;
Sunflower family (Compositae)

A hardy perennial, almost shrubby, growing up to 4 feet tall, its spreading
branches covered with white, silky hairs. The leaves are much-divided and
have an intense, persistent bitter flavor. The flower heads are greenish or
yellow, 1/8 inch wide, and very numerous. Its seeds are grayish and very
small. Native to Europe and sometimes as an escape in North America.

Cultivation and Propagation: Wormwood grows well in poor, dry sandy soils
in a sunny location. The seeds, due to their small size, should be sown in
flats where they will not be washed out or packed down by rain. When large
enough to be set out they should be planted not closer than 15 inches apart
for the first year. The next spring alternate plants should be removed,
leaving not less than 30 inches between those remaining. Ripened cuttings
may be taken in March or October. These should be set in sandy soil in a
shady place and kept moist until well-rooted. It may also be propagated by
division of the roots. Weeds should be kept down and the plants should be
fertilized very lightly once a year.

Harvesting: The tops and leaves should be gathered and dried in July and
August, when the plant is in flower.



SUPPLIERS

No one supplier has all or even most of the seeds or dried herbs or plants
mentioned in this book, but each has its own good selection. The companies
listed below are straight legitimate businesses. Their function is to
provide herbs or seeds in general. They do not expect that their products
are to be used psychotropically. When ordering by mail from these
companies, sound normal and do not ask about doses, effects, etc. If they
think that their products are being used as drugs they will probably not
want to do business with you. In your letters include a self-addressed
stamped envelope. This will make you appear more responsible. Inquire about
availability before ordering and include $.25 for postage and handling when
requesting catalogs.

Seeds, Mail Order

     W. A. Burpee Seed Co., 6450 Rutland, Riverside, CA 92502

     George Park Seed Co., Inc., Greenwood, SC 29646

     Redwood City Seed Co., Box 36l, Redwood City, CA 94061

Cacti

     A. Hugh Dial, 7685 Deer Trail, Yucca Valley, CA.
     Specializing in ~Trichocereus~ and ~Coryphantha~. Write for
     availability before ordering.

     New Mexico Cactus Research, Box 787, Belen, NM.
     Cactus seed. Write for availability.

Hops Roots

     Wine and the People, P.O. Box 2914, Oakland, CA 94618.
     Available in autumn and winter. Inquire first.

Dried Herbs and Botanics

     Magic Garden Herb CO., Box 233, Fairfax, CA.
     Herbs wholesale and retail.

Books

     ~Home Grown Highs~ by Mary Jane Superweed. Price $1.00 plus $0.25
     handling from MSA, 417 North Third, Philadelphia, PA 19123

     ~Legal Highs~, produced by the Twentieth Century Alchemist, contains
     reference information on the dosages, uses, analysis of active
     constituents and effects of most of the plants discussed in this book.
     Available from Twentieth Century Alchemist, P.O. Box 3684, Manhattan
     Beach, CA 90266

     ~The First Book of Sacraments of the Church of the Tree of Life~.
     Available from the Tree of Life Press, 405 Columbus Ave., San
     Francisco, CA 94133. Price is $5.00. $0.50 extra for first-class
     mailing.

     ~Pesticides and Your Environment~ by John Cary Stone. Available from
     the National Wildlife Federation, 1412 Sixteenth St., N.W.,
     Washington, DC 20036. Single copy free; additional copies $0.20 each.

     ~The Psilocybin Producer's Guide~ by Adam Gottlieb. $1.75 from
     Twentieth Century Alchemist, P.O. Box 3684, Manhattan Beach, CA 90266

     ~Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower's Guide~ by O.T. Oss & O.N. Oeric.
     $4.95 from And/Or Press, P.O. Box 2246, Berkeley, CA 94702. A concise,
     comprehensible and detailed volume.

     ~Psychedelics Encyclopedia~, by Peter Stafford, $7.95 from And/Or
     Press, P.O. Box 2246, Berkeley, CA 94702. Contains references and
     information on a full range of psychoactive plants and substances.



GLOSSARY

     Annual. A plant that naturally completes its life cycle in one year.

     Aril. An outer covering of a seed.

     Biennial. A plant that lives two years from sowing, usually flowering
     in the second year.

     Capsule. A seed pod that opens when dry and ripe.

     Calyx. The small whorl of modified leaves at the base of a flower.

     Compound leaves. Leaves divided into two or more leaflets.

     Cotyledon. The first leaf or leaves in the seed. In some plants the
     cotyledons remain underground in the seedcoat.

     Germination. The sprouting of a seed.

     Heel. A small portion of the previous year's growth at the base of a
     cutting.

     Herbaceous. Dying to the ground or lacking a definite woody structure.

     Hilum. The small scar on a seed where it was attached to the seed pod.

     Involucre. A whorl of small leaves close underneath a flower or flower
     cluster.

     Layers. See ``Propagation''.

     Leaflet. One part of a compound leaf.

     Node. The place on a stem where leaves or branches originate.

     Ovate. Having an outline the shape of an egg, with the stalk at the
     large end.

     Perennial. Growing for more than two years. Trees and shrubs are
     perennials.

     Pinching. Removing the terminal bud.

     Pinnate. Feather-formed. Said of a compound leaf with the leaflets
     along both sides of the leaf stalk.

     Raceme. An elongated cluster of flowers.

     Rhizome. An underground stem.

     Sepals. The separate leaves of the calyx.

     Suckers. Small plants arising from the base of a larger plant.

     Taproot. A primary root growing straight down from a plant.

     Terminal. Growing at the end of a branch.

     Umbel. A flower cluster in the shape of an umbrella.

     Under glass. Grown in the greenhouse or, in the case of a cutting,
     with a jar placed over it.


PRONUNCIATION

Botanical nomenclature is a language in itself, thrown into a Latin form.
Many names are not pronounced according to the rules of classical Latin.
The pronunciation guide given below is based on the ~Standard Cyclopedia of
Horticulture~, and is consistent with standard horticultural pronunciation
in most instances.

Accent marks indicate the syllable bearing principal stress and the quality
of the accented vowel. A grave accent (`) designates a ``long'' vowel, and
an acute accent (') designates a short vowel.

The following are the vowel sounds: a` as in cane, a' as in can; e` as in
meet, e' as in met; i` as in pine, i' as in pin; o` as in cone, o' as in
con; u` as in jute, u' as in jut; y is often used as a vowel instead of i.

The combination oi as in ``-oides'' is pronounced ``oh-EYE-deez''; as an
ending it is pronounced ``oy.'' Ph is pronounced as f. Ti followed by a
vowel has the sound of ``she'' as in Nicotiana (``ni-koe-she-AY-na'') and
Spartium (``SPAR-she-um''). Oe is pronounced as the long e in ``meet.'' Ei
as an ending is pronounced as two syllables, ``ay-eye,'' as in blumei
(``BLUE-may-eye''). Ia as an ending is pronounced ``ee-ah,'' as in Heimia
(``HI-mee-ah'').

The following botanical names appear in the text:

     A'brus precato`rius
     A'corus ca'lamus
     Actini'dia poly'gama
     Are`ca ca'techu
     Argemo`ne mexica`na
     Argyre`ia nervo`sa
     Artemi'sia absi'nthium
     A'tropa bellado'nna
     Callia'ndra ano'mala
     Ca`tha edu`lis
     Catha'ranthus ro`sea
     Co`leus blu`mei
     C. pu`milus
     Coria`ria thymifo`lia
     Corypha'ntha macrome`ris
     Cy'tisus canarie'nsis
     C. scopa`rius
     Datu`ra arbo`rea
     D. candida
     D. chlora'ntha
     D. fastuo`sa
     D. ino'xia
     D. me'tel
     D. meteloi`des
     D. sangui'nea
     D. stramo`nium
     D. s. var. ta'tula
     D. suave`olens
     E'phedra nevade'nsis
     Erythri`na flabellifo'rmis
     Eschscho'lzia califo'nica
     Foeni'culum vulga`re
     Geni'sta canarie'nsis
     Hei`mia myrtifo`lia
     H. salicifo`lia
     Hu`imulus lu`pulus
     Hydra'ngea panicula`ta grandiflo`ra
     Hyoscy`amus ni`ger
     I`lex paraguaye'nsis
     Iochro`ma cocci'neum
     I. fuchsioi`des
     I. lanceola`tum
     I. tubulo`sum
     Ipmoe`a tri'color
     I. viola`cea
     Kaempfe`ria gala'nga
     Lactu`ca vi`rosa
     Lobe`lia infla`ta
     Mandra'gora officina`rum
     Merre'mia tubero`sa
     Mira'bilis multiflo`ra
     Myri'stica fra`grans
     Ne'peta cata`ria
     Nicotia`na taba'cum
     Passiflo`ra incarna`ta
     Pega'num ha'rmala
     Pi`per methy'sticum
     Podophy'llum pelta`tum
     Rhyncho`sia phaseoloi`des
     Rive`a corymbo`sa
     Sa'lvia divino'rum
     Sa'ssafras a'lbidum
     S. officina`le
     So'phora secundiflo`ra
     Spa'rtium ju'nceum
     Trichoce`reus pa'chanoi
     Turne`ra diffu`sa
     Vi'nca ro`sea

ICRCAT000002

X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
