                
                   THE HIGHS AND LOWS OF ALCOHOL

AKA: ethanol, booze.

Price: varies, but in London pubs lager costs around £1.60 a pint, bitter 
from around £1. Spirits cost around £1.20 a measure and wine £1.

Form: liquid. Alcohol drinks mainly consists of water and ethyl alcohol (or 
ethanol) produced by fermenting fruits, vegetables and grain. Even spirits, 
the strongest alcoholic beverages, contain around 50 per cent water. 
Alcohol produced from wood (methyl alcohol) is used in methylated spirits 
and surgical spirits.

Duration of high: several hours, depending on dose.

Legal status: it is an offence to give alcohol to a child under five. In 
Northern Ireland under-18s are banned from licensed premises, in this 
country, those over the age of 14 are allowed in but not allowed to drink 
until aged 18. It is also an offence to be drunk in a public place, 
including licensed premises, to be drunk and disorderly, and to drink and 
drive. Alcohol is not allowed on trains, coaches, or minibuses to and from 
sporting events and in some areas of the country, notably Coventry, bylaws 
have been introduced banning drinking in outdoor public places.

History: beer and wine drinking have both been around for centuries. In 
1495, an act was introduced giving Justices of the Peace to close 
troublesome ale houses that were often associated with political agitation. 
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, young people's access 
to alcohol was restricted. It wasn't until World War I, however, that 
restricted opening hours were introduced to prevent drinking impairing the 
efficiency of war industries. Over 90 percent of the adult population now 
drink, and despite licensing laws, it is thought that 60 percent of 
children between 13 and 17 are likely to have bought alcohol and about  a 
third of 13- to 16- year-olds drink at least once a week, albeit at home 
and in very small amounts. Voluntarily imposed advertising restrictions on 
TV as well as a ban on ads directed at youngsters, linking drinking to 
driving or encouraging excessive use.

Highs: in moderate amounts, alcohol makes most people feel less inhibited, 
as well as happier and more relaxed.

Lows: alcohol is addictive and dependency  quickly builds up, meaning users 
need more and more to produce the desired effect. It is very difficult to 
predict the short-term effect alcohol will have on users. Sometimes, even 
in small doses, it will cause aggression and mood swings. In large amounts, 
alcohol can cause double vision, loss of balance and loss of consciousness. 
Hangovers are suffered by those who use alcohol excessively. Symptoms 
include headaches, nausea, anxiety and dehydration. Long-term effects, 
particularly with sustained heavy use, include dependence, stomach and 
liver disorders and brain damage. Alcohol contained in methylated spirits 
and surgical spirit (the former is often drunk by hardened alcoholics 
because it's so cheap) is exceptionally toxic, frequently causing 
blindness, coma and death.

Tips: Try avoid drinking excessive amounts and, where possible, drink soft 
drinks or water between alcoholic ones. One of the main causes of hangovers 
is dehydration - drinking non-alcoholic fluids before and during a hangover 
will alleviate symptoms.


From the magazine TimeOut Nr. 1239 May 18-25 1994

Typed Dr. Benway