     
            THE HIGHS AND LOWS OF COCAINE HYDROCHLORIDE

AKA: coke, charlie, white.

Price: £50-£70 a gramme.

Form: white powder which can be snorted, smoked(mixed with tobacco or pure 
- freebasing), injected or rubbed on teeth or gums.

Duration of high: 30-60 minutes.

History: chewing of leaves from the coca bush (Erythraxylon coca) by South 
Americans dates back to 2500BC at least. To the Incas the leaf was divine 
and was used in religious ceremonies and for medical purposes. Cocaine only 
really took of in Europe in the mid-nineteenth century when a German 
chemists Freidrich Gaedake and Albert Niemann isolated the main alkaloid of 
the coca leaf and it became known as cocaine. Said to be a wonder drug, it 
was used in medicines, alcoholic and soft drinks and could be bought over 
the counter in pure form. Vin Mariani was wine produced in the latter part 
of the nineteenth century, containing extracts of coca leaves(endorsed by 
the likes of the Tsar of Russia, Sarah Bernhardt and the then Prince of 
Wales, later Edward VII)and, in 1886, Coca-Cola was launched on to the 
market. It contained cocaine until 1903 and still contain de-cocainised 
extracts from the coca plant. The sale of cocaine was only made illegal in 
America in 1914 and in this country in 1917.

Highs: in the short term, cocaine makes you feel you can rule the world. 
Users experience increased feelings of well being, excitement, pleasure, 
confidence and energy. The drug also reduces the need to sleep or eat and 
is relatively subtle so, witnessed by the untrained eye, behavioural 
changes will largely go unnoticed.

Lows: cocaine increases breathing rate and raises blood pressure, heart 
rate and body temperature. A small number of people have developed severe 
respiratory problems and some of these users have died; other complain of 
over-stimulation. Although for may years cocaine was thought to be only 
psychologically rather than physically addictive, it is now believed that 
prolonged use will lead to physical dependency. Although tolerance does not 
increase with long-term use euphoria is often replaced by restlessness, 
hypersensitivity, nausea, insomnia and weight loss. In some users, cocaine, 
even in small amounts, can cause feelings of anxiety and/or aggression and 
irritability. As with amphetamines, cocaine overdose is extremely rare. 
Symptoms include extreme over-stimulation, racing pulse or palpitations, 
severe chest pains, difficulty breathing, shaking sweating, muscle spasms 
and general stiffness.

Tips: a mild sedative can sometimes alleviate unpleasant reactions to 
cocaine. Never share needles if injecting because of the risk of AIDS.

From the magazine TimeOut No. 1239 May 18-25 1994

Typed by Dr. Benway