A LIKELY SYNTHESIS OF DESOXYEPHEDRINE (METHAMPHETAMINE)

The author does not advocate the preparation or use of any illegal
product.  The information supplied defines a potentially dangerous
process and if attempted, in countries where legal, only qualified
individuals should attempt the procedures described. This
information is supplied for educational purposes only.

Ephedrine (and also pseudo-ephedrine or Sudafed as well as
nor-ephedrine or phenylpropanolamine, the PPA found in over the
counter diet pills) are all but one step away from speed of the
great roto (as I think Kerouac called it).

Anyway, the only difference between ephedrine and amphetamine is
that ephedrine et. al. have an OH group extra. Get rid of that OH
group and replace it with a hydrogen and you have amphets. 
Traditional books specify hydrogenation (aka reduction) of the
ephedrine molecule to convert, but traditional methods are not
particularly easy.  One underground book does say that practically
any gentle reduction method will work and this may be so. Probably
you could use zinc amalgum with H2 gas.

I suspect there's an easier method though. Sorry folks, I cant
verify this through my sources but would welcome any input from
those knowledgeble in the field.

Ephedrine sales over  500gm are reported. HI (hydriotic acid) sales
are reported, or supposed to be in any quantity. Not really
reported and turned in by chem co; just kept track of in record
book. I've heard rumors of banning sales of ephedrine etc. in
several states. Dont know if this would include Sudafed tabs or
not. 

Recent news article says Czech Republic alchemists produce a
product called pervitin (gaining popularity in Europe & USA) and it
is simply methamphetamine produced from ephedrine.

Anyway, all I know now is that HI can be made by adding a small
amount of RED phosphorus (the kind used on the strike surface of
safety matches, RELATIVELY non flamable) to iodine crystals and
adding water.  I dont yet have proportions, so dont try this
unless YOU do. Ideally you'd get a fuming acid solution similar to
HCL.  

I'm guessing here: but it may be simply a matter of adding the
ephedrine or one of it's salts or variants to the HI solution.
The reaction may proceed through the ephedrine iodide stage to the
methamphetamine.  Such is the reducing strength of HI solution. If
any iodine were to precipitate out or be left over, you might have
a clean up chore, but since raw amphetamine is not soluble in water
it might separate out as a layer to be siphoned off.

Other possibilities are different solvents (use them to remove the
active product or to remove the waste products) or fractional
distillation.

I'm not advocating any of this, but if anyone cares to check it out
in the literature... There is surely some reason that HI and
ephedrine are considered precursors.



ALWAYS HAVE A FIRE EXTINGUISHER AT HAND, AND WEAR SAFETY GOGGLES.

Advise us if you find anything else out about this method.  BTW,
the other file is correct about bikers & product. DONT SELL, DO
TELL.

X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
