
   During the late '70's, the United Kingdom gave rise to a 17 
year old female musical artist named Kate Bush.  With the help of
Pink Floyd's David Gilmour, she burst on the scene with a 
screech, a wail and a strange hook-ridden paen based on and named
for the biting novel "Wuthering Heights".  Forsaking conventional
techniques for more innovative ones, she received accolades from 
critics and the record buying public at large - in her native 
homeland.

   Subsequent album releases such as "Never For Ever", Lionheart"
and "The Dreaming" never really caught fire on these shores.  
Perhaps that's why loyal Kate Bush fans developed a bond between
this artist and her music.

   Catching up with Bush wasn't exactly and easy proposition.  
Though she hasn't formally toured in North America 
(though has appeared on Saturday Night Live in '78 and a brief 
promotional visit in February) she is showing a high profile 
throughout Europe.

   When finally making contact with her, one was made abundantly 
clear "I'm concerned with promoting the music, I'm not really 
interested in promoting me." 

   The statement is an accurate one. Kate keeps her private life 
tightly under wraps.  Whatever information is discovered about 
the singer/songwriter/composer/producer must be learned from 
interviews, or more importantly, from the music itself.

   1978 was an auspicious year for Bush. Records played often on 
British airwaves, during that time, were often greeted with 
little enthusiasm.  When her single "Heights" was introduced it 
rose to the #1 spot in 3 weeks. A welcome change! The whirlwind 
journey of the single, and the album debut propelled Bush to 
superstar status in native England and neighboring lands.

   By now, Bush's continued evolvement into new territories is 
better known.
Her latest epic "Hound of Love" shows that this artist won't 
change her style to suit the average joe.  However, the 
prominence of dance club hits and a larger promotional effort 
landed Bush
in the top 30 for the first time in her
8 year career.

   When one is constantly awarded with such titles as "Best 
Female Singer" and has received gold records with regularity, 
it's tough to break away from the situation long enough to try 
and duplicated that success elsewhere. Having focused on England,
Sweden, Germany, and the like, rumor has it that the 
concentration will now be on North American audiences.
   Stay tuned!


Selected Kate Bush Discography

LP's/EP's

The Kick Inside
Never for Ever
Lionheart
On Stage
Kate Bush
The Dreaming
Hounds of Love




X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
