An African Aphrodisiac which librates women and fortifies Men

Making love while stoned on Khij is an incredibly beautiful experience.
All I can say it try it.

1) Put a few oranges in a paper bag and leave them in a dark closet for
about 2 weeks. When a powdery blue-green mold covers the surface of
the fruit you may begin the process

2) Sift 4 ounces of marijuana through a screen.

3) Place seeds and stems in a large pot and cover with isopropyl
(rubbing) alcohol. (if you have seeds and stems from other lids and
kilos or seeds left over from anywhere you can add them too).

4) Cover the pot with lid and heat on electric hot plate for 3 hours.
(Caution: alcohol is inflammable. Do not use gas flame.)

5) Strain liquids and store in container labeled soultion A.

6) Repeat steps 4 and 5 with fresh alcohol.

7) repeat step 4 and 5 with water instead of alcohol. Store in
container labeled solution B. (This time gas flame may be used with 1
hour boiling time.)

8) Repeat step 7

9) On an electric hot plate outside or in a well-ventilated room reduce
volume of solution A by boiling.

10 On a gas flame reduce volume of solution B by boiling.

11) When both solutions are considerably reduced (but not too thick),
combine the two solutions and boil them down further on hot plate.
Lower temperature as mixture thickens.

12) When this combination begins to get syrupy allow to cool. When
cooled it should be about the consistency of a thin syrup. If it is
still very watery it may be boiled down further and cooled again.

13) Place sifted marijuana leaf into same pot with the extracted syrup.
Knead it and roll it around in this until leaf is thoroughly and evenly
coated with the stuff.

14) Keeping the grass in a moist, spongy condition, add about a
teaspoon of mold (remeber the oranges ) per 4 oz of grass. Knead it
thoroghly into the grass; use rubber gloves and when finished be sure
to salvage the tars that cling to them.

15) Put the grass into a polyethylene bag. Close the bag so that it is
snug to the grass, thus minimizing air in the bag. Store this in a dark
place.

16) After a few weeks when the grass has developed a sharp ammonia like
oder spread it in a baking tin. Preheat oven to 300 for 15 minutes.
Turn off heat. Place tin in oven for 15 minutes. Repeat process until
dry.

Khala-Khij is a powdery and does not pack well in a joint. It is best
smoked in a small toking pipe. Are you in for a treat!


X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
