
What Happens
When Music
Meets the Brain

WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)

Music is a window on the brain, scientists say. Few human activities exercise
as many brain functions: Playing music demands motor skill, and listening to it
stimulates both feelings and intellectual faculties. Scientists now use music
to study sense perception, emotions, coordination, timing and the functions of
each of the brain's hemispheres.

The relationship between music and the brain is a fast-growing area of study.
Last year, Frank Wilson, a Walnut Creek, Calif., neurologist, organized a
conference on the subject, bringing together some 300 interested professionals.

Several books on the subject have been published in recent years, and a new
psychology journal called Music Perception was founded in 1983.

Strokes and other brain disorders reveal much about brain functions, including
music and language. In one recently reported case, a stroke knocked out only
its victim's ability to name fruits and vegetables, suggesting that categories
of words are organized in the same area of the brain. Similarly, strokes have
shown that key musical abilities are organized in the right half of the brain,
which is associated with emotions and the integration of complex details into
wholes.

Tedd Judd, a psychologist at the Pacific Medical Center in Seattle, tells of a
composer who suffered a stroke on the right side of the brain and could still
compose melodies. But he lost the ability to compose counterpoint, in which
melodies are integrated according to complex rules.

Strokes on the right side sometimes erase the ability to sing, even though the
memory of song lyrics may be intact. People afflicted that way may speak in a
monotone because they can no longer put melody into their voices, says Elliott
Ross, a neurologist at the University of Texas medical  school.

But scientists now also realize that music isn't totally a right-brain
function. At the University of California at Los Angeles, John Mazziotta, a
researcher, found that in most people listening to simple melodies, the right
side of the brain was activated; but those who visualized what they heard as
notes on a page mainly used the left side.

Music, long considered the language of emotions, is also an ideal stimulus for
experiments on feelings. At Pennsylvania State University, a psychologist,
Julian Thayer, plays different kinds of music from Bach to jazz while testing
listeners for heart rates and other indicators of emotions. Among other things,
his research suggests that just as a radio has separate controls for tone and
volume, emotions involve independent levels of pleasantness and intensity.

Brain researchers have been trying for years to understand how the brain
handles sensory input, and music is important to their study of sound
perception. Scientists believe that some elements of music -- like common pitch
intervals -- have been shaped to reflect the structure of the human auditory
system. For example, most people, even in different cultures, perceive tones
separated by an octave as closely related. This may result from the channeling
of nerve impulses caused by such tones to the same nerve cell in the brain,
says Diana Deutsch, a psychologist at the University of California at San
Diego.

Tempo is another musical element that intrigues brain researchers. Most people
can't both walk and chew gum at different tempos because the brain can
apparently monitor only one internal metronome at a time, says George P. Moore,
a researcher at the University of Southern California.

Mr. Moore is also interested in the motor skills involved in playing a musical
instrument, where muscle coordination and timing are crucial. Using sensors,
including small needles inserted into musicians' hands, he has learned that
performers use unconscious tricks to improve their sound. For example, Mr.
Moore found that when playing trills on a violin, some players lighten finger
pressure. Then, to compensate for the pitch distortion the lighter pressure
would cause, they adjust their hand positions. "Musicians don't even know they
do these things," he says, which suggests that they subliminally refer to
detailed brain "maps" of their instruments to create the desired sound.

Internal maps may guide listeners as well as players, which could explain the
difficulty many people have learning to like unfamiliar music. There may even
be music so alien that our brains aren't equipped to make sense of it. "Some
avant-garde composers who base their music on new arbitrary ystems are
interesting," says Roger Shepard, a Stanford University psychology professor.
"But their music may never take hold with listeners because it doesn't mesh
effectively with the deep cognitive structures of the mind."

 
 
 


X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
