
                      /=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=
                           Making Nitrous Oxide
                         from Tele-Theif Express
                           original file from
                        Z. DeBuggah from Folo Zone
                      /=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=/=
                              416/283-1854

Making Lauging Gas/Whip-its/Nirous Oxide/etc.
---------------------------------------------

WHAT YOU NEED:
--------------

o Ammonium Nitrate (NH4NO3) - get a good grade, it's a fertilizer and comes
  in 50lb. bags.  Also available from lab supply companies like VW&R or
  American Scientific at a much greater cost.

o Clean sand.  Fairly fine grained (30 mesh or finer.)  If you collect your
  and you get fresh water sand, it will be necessary to wash it thoroughly
  with water then dry it before using.  You must also wash the sand before
  reusing it.

o Electric hot plate (500 to 2500 watt) with variable heat.

o Stainless steel dial thermometer.  (This is the only metal item which may
  be used.)  It must go to 250 C (450 F).  Select the Erlenmeyer flask (next
  item) and the thermometer so that the thermometer can reach at least
  within 1/16" of the bottom of the flask through the stopper.

o A 2000 to 4000 ml PYREX or KIMAX Erlenmeyer flask.

o Several feet of 3/8" clear vinyl or surgical rubber tubing.

o At least 4 8mm ID glass or plastic tubing "T's".

o 1 120 degree bend 8mm ID PYREX glass elbow, with about 3" of tubing on
  each side of the bend.

o 7 6-8" long pieces of 8mm ID glass or plastic tubing.

o 3 6-8 feet long 1.5" to 2" diameter glass or clear plastic pipes.

o 1 two hole rubber or neoprene stopper to fit the top of the Erlenmeyer
  flask.  One hole should fit the 8mm ID PYREX glass elbow, and the other
  hole should fit the stainless steel dial thermometer.

o 6 one hole rubber or neoprene stoppers that will fit the ends of the
  clear plastic or glass pipes.  The holes in the stoppers must fit the
  straight 8mm ID glass or plastic tubes.


  NH NO  ---------------------->  N O  +  2*H O
    4  3                           2         2

  Ammonium                      nitrous    two 
  Nitrate                        oxide    water


Set-up
------

   If you've gotten this far - remember - you MUST meet the exact quiality
specifications of the equipment list.  If you really want a do-it-yourself
nitrous oxide generator, you want a sturdy set-up you can over and over and
enjoy again and again!

See IFF files included for the diagram of the set-up.

Assembly
--------

NOTE:  When inserting tubing through stopper holes, ALWAYS WRAP AND HOLD THE
       TUBING WITH A CLOTH.  Also moisten the tip of the tubing and the
       stopper hole with glycerin, soap, or spit. (never oil)

1>  Into the stopper with two holes, inset the thermometer far enough so
    that when the stopper is put into the Erlenmeyer flask, it almost
    touches the bottom of the flask (but don't allow it to touch), and then
    insert one end of the glass elbow far enough through the stopper so that
    it sticks out 1/4" to 1/2".

2>  Into the six one-hole stoppers, insert a piece of the 8mm ID glass (or
    plastic) tubing so that 1/2" to 3/4" protrudes from the narrow end of
    the stopper.

3>  Now select your set-up space so that there is 1.5 feet of space clear in
    all directions around the hotplate, so that the three scrubber pipes can
    lie side by side where they will not be knocked over.

4>  Take approximately 2 feet of the 3/8" flexible tubing and connect
    one end to the glass elbow in the two-hole stopper, and the other end to
    the middle of one of the 8mm ID glass (or hard plastic) "T's".

5>  With short pieces (select lengths for a neat fit) of 3/8" tubing and
    another 8mm "T" assemble the INLET SET manifold and connect it to the
    bottom end of the scrubbers.  Stoppers may then be inserted into the
    lower end of the scrubber pipes.

6>  Elevate the OUT end of the scrubber pipes so that the upper end is 6" to
    8" above the IN end, but no more, and then fill the pipes with water
    until they are full within 4" to 8" of the top (outlet) end, and insert
    the outlet stoppers.  Try to fill all the scrubbers equally full.

7>  With short pieces of 3/8" tubing and two 8mm ID "T's", prepare and
    connect the OUTLET SET manifold to the scrubbers similar to the way the
    set was connected in step 5.

8>  To the last "T" of the OUTLET SET (of "T's" manifold), connect a fairly
    long piece of 3/8" tubing to reach a "safe" location (where connection
    and disconnection of the receiver bags will not disturb the scrubbers)
    and secure it.  Then put the last piece of 8mm ID hard tubing into the
    free end.

9>  Finally, prepare several receiever bags by inserting about an 8" piece
    of tubing into the top so that 3" or 4" sticks out of the bag and secure
    it in place with a rubber band.

> > > > > > > > > > > > > > > CONGRATULATIONS < < < < < < < < < < < < < < <

   You are now the proud owner of your very own Nitrous Oxide Generator.

Operation
---------

   First, prepare a quantity of a mixture containing 1/3 sand and 2/3
ammonium nitrate.  Then pour enough of the mixture into the erlenmeyer flask
to give 1.5" to 2" in the bottom of the flask.  Put the flask onto the
hotplate, and insert the two-hole stopper, firmly but not too tight. <<This
stopper is your safety valve while the system is operating.>> --BUT--

   WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING
   W                                                                     W
   A Once the heating of the mixture in the erlenmeyer flask has started A
   R you MUST REMOVE the two-hole stopper from the flask before turning  R
   N off the heat.  Otherwise as the flask starts to cool off, it will   N
   I draw water from the scrubbers back into the hot flask and may crack I
   N or EXPLODE the erlenmeyer flask with the steam formed inside.       N
   G                                                                     G
   WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING-WARNING

   Now you may begin heating the flask.  Turn the hotplate to medium or
medium-high and watch the thermometer.  If the temperature climbs very fast,
turn the hotplate down, but be patient about turning it up.  Occasional
bubbles will be noted going through the scrubbers as the air in the system
expands.  At 210 C (410 F) a yellowish to orange-brown will begin filling
the flask, and the bubbling throught the scrubbers will become steady.

   At this time, adjust the upper end heights of the scrubber tubes so that
each one gets about the same amount of gas passing through it.  Keep your
eye on the temperature, and it should not climb much over the 210-220 C
(410-430 F) marks.  Also the gas at the top of the scrubbers MUST BE
PERFECTLY COLORLESS! Otherwise, turn down the heat setting.  If the gas flow
is too low to give a steady flow throught all three scrubbers, increase the
heat slightly.

   Once you've run your system a time or two, you'll know what your
operating settings are.

   As soon as the gas flow is steady and clean, connect a receiving bag  to
the final outlet tube, and allow the bag to fill.  It may be necessary to
add more amonium nitrate-sand mixture to the flask from time to time -- wear
gloves as the flask will be HOT when removing the stopper.  It is also a
good idea to turn off the hotplate while the stopper is out of the flask.

Once you've filled a few bags with laughing gas, you're ready to try some.
Just inhale from the bag and hold it in as long as you can.  You'll know
what to do from there.

   It's also rumored that use of marijuana, hash, cocaine, LSD or various
other drugs will intensify and lengthen the nitrous oxide experience.  It
might also be possible that repeated inhalations of nitrous oxide may cause
a more intense reaction.

My predictions:

Mixing nitrous oxide inhalations with the use of:

Marijuana: euphoric state approximating an intensified marijuana 'high'.
Hashish: a great happiness and cheer overwhelms you for about an hour.
Cocaine: TREMENDOUS paranoia and depression.
LSD: heightened senses and awareness. Hallucinations involving whipped
cream.
Alchohol: hopefully cause immediate death.  There's no excuse to use
alchohol when there are so many other more effective and tastier drugs.


RAT HEAD - 415-524-3649                                                                             


X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
