--------------------------------------------------------------------------

                            RECOMMENDED DOSAGES

--------------------------------------------------------------------------

        All dosages recommendations are for adult application only.

ADRAFINIL: A unique substance which improves daytime alertness and
vigilance without altering the phases of sleep. Take 2 to 4 tablets per
day. After 8 to 10 days of treatment feelings of fatigue disappear, after
15 days there is a powerful re-energizing effect on activity and after 1 to
3 months cognitive effects are experienced. Intellectual function is
improved, particularly, the ability to formulate new ideas and recall
information.
Avoid if you suffer from epilepsy, kidney or liver impairment.

AMPHOTERICIN: If treating Candida infections take 6 to 8 capsules per day
for 15 to 20 days, in two or three doses.

BIOSTIM: Take two tablets per day for 8 days, after three weeks one tablet
per day for 8 days, after a further 8 three weeks take one tablet per day
for 8 days. Repeat after three months if necessary.

CENTROPHENOXINE (LUCIDRIL): Take one tablet per day, usually in the A. M.
Elderly persons may find a higher dose (2 to 4 tablets per day) of greater
benefit. The higher dose should be taken throughout the day, with food.

DEPRENYL: Take 5 to 15mg per day for approximately 30 days. A common side
effect can be nausea, to help offset this commence with one tablet per day
and _gradually_ increase the dose. Repeat the course as required or as
directed by your medical advisor.

DHEA: For anti-aging and weight-loss use, take one to two 100mg capsules
daily with food.

FENOZOLONE (ORDINATOR): To treat mental and intellectual fatigue and
improve memory, take 1 to 3 tablets before midday. Do not take if you
suffer from any serious cardiovascular problem, epilepsy, hyperthyroidism,
major anxiety or if you have a history of anorexia. Do not take continuously
for longer than 6 weeks. Avoid if you are currently using MAO inhibitors.
If you experience dry mouth, sweating or elevated blood pressure reduce the
dose or discontinue the use. Do not use along with other mental stimulants
and reduce your intake of caffeine-containing drinks if necessary.

HYDERGINE (Generic as Ergoloid Mesylates): This can be taken at a dosage
range of between 5 and 30mg per day. The higher dose should be taken
throughout the day, either with or without food.

IDEBENONE: A powerful brain metabolism enhancer. Used to treat memory
impairment due to stroke or arteriosclerosis and to improve emotional and /
or speech disturbances. At a dose of 2 x 30mg a day idebenone has a
powerful cognitive enhancement effect in healthy people.

KH3: Take one or two tablets per day, on an empty stomach.

L DOPA (SINEMET): L-Dopa is a powerful drug to be used with caution and
care. Suggested use; Take one tablet per day with food. A common side
effect can be nausea, this will usually disappear with continued use. Do
not use L-Dopa with procaine and take any L-Phenylalanine containing
products separatly from L-Dopa. Persons with narrow angle glaucoma and/or
melanoma should avoid L-Dopa completely.

LISTOMIN: A safe and effective drug to combat insomnia and other sleep
disorders. Each capsule contains 200mg butoctamide semisuccinate. Take
three capsules (600mg) at night. Avoid alcohol when using Listomin. Only
take at night and do not attempt to drive after taking the drug. Listomin
has very few side effects and is well tolerated. Less than 4% of those
taking Listomin will experience mild side effects such as dizziness,
headache, fatigue and nausea. Listomin is NOT similar to Dalmane, Doriden,
Nembutal or Restoril.

MELATONIN: Levels of this essential natural substance decline dramatically
with age. Suggested dose to help restore melatonin levels - take one 3mg
capsule per day either early in the evening or immediatly prior to bedtime
if working irregular shifts. Under no circumstances exceed 6mg per day.

MINAPRINE (CANTOR): The first of a new class of antidepressant/psycho-
stimulant drugs with unique effects including memory enchancement.
Minaprine is effective for the treatment of senile dementia and Alzheimer's
disease. Take 1 to 3 tablets per day. At least 7 days treatment are needed
before any benificial effects are experienced. Avoid minaprine if you
suffer from epilepsy.

OXIRACETAM: A nootropic drug proven to be 3 to 5 times more effective than
piracetam in various tests. A dose of 160mg per day improves cognitive
functions and combat mental decline.

PARLODEL (BROMOCRYPTINE): This is a very powerful product, dosage should
not exceed 2.5mg per day. It is recommended that the initial dose should be
1.25mg per day increasing to 2.5mg after 4 weeks or so.

PHENYTOIN (Generic Dilantin): Commence with 100mg per day increasing to
around 3 tablets per day over the next 3 months. If you are intending to
use this product to treat depression, we suggest you consult with your
medical advisor to ensure the correct dose required for your individual
case.

PIRACETAM: Suggested use is to take 800mg to 1600mg per day for two months,
resting for one month and repeating as required. As this product is
virtually non toxic at any level it can be safely used to treat Alzheimer's
disease, or any other forms of senile dementia, at doses of 3000mg per day.
The effect of Piracetam will be improved if either, or both,
Dimethylaminoethanol (DMAE) and/or Centrophenoxine are taken at the same
time.

RIBAVIRIN: An effective treatment for most viral diseases. A first day
loading dose of 1600mg (in 4 divided doses) is suggested followed by
800mg/day in 4 divided doses. The drug should be taken for at least 5 days
and no longer than 14 days. Do not use ribavirin if you have kidney or
liver impairment.

ROXITHROMYCIN: An ultra powerful antibiotic with low toxicity. Effective
for the treatment of bronchitis, ear nose and throat infections, non-
gonococcal genital infections (male urethritis / cervio - vaginitis), and
skin infections. Take 2 tablets per day for 7 to 10 days. For optimum
result roxithromycin should be taken before meals.

SULBUTIAMINE (ARCALION): To combat fatigue take two 200mg tablets per day,
always with breakfast or any A.M. meal for a period of 20 days. We
recommend you do not exceed three tablets at any time as this very powerful
product may cause severe headaches. Other than this Sulbutiamine has no
known adverse side effects.

VASOPRESSIN NASAL SPRAY (DIAPID): Do not use this product continuously,
use it only on occasions when you require to be at peak mental states,
before important business meetings, exams, etc. Keep the product
refrigerated between use.

VINPOCETINE: A side effect free synthetic derivate of vincamine (vincamine
can cause severe heart rhytm disorders like torsade de point). Vinpocetine
is three to four times as potent as vincamine at improving cerebral
circulation and overall is OVER TWICE as potent as vincamine in humans.
Vinpocetine has wide ranging effects and can be used to improve memory,
treat stroke, menopausal symptoms, macular degeneration, impaired hearing
and tinnitus. The usual oral starting dose is 1-2 tablets three times
daily, to be followed by a maintenance dose of 1 tablet three times daily
for a longer period of time. Vinpocetine has not been reported to to
interact with other drugs and may be used in combination.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------
