


                      SLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFS
                      LD             thE              GL
                      F     SMURf LibERAtiON FRONt     F
                      S            PRESENtS            S
                      L                                L
                      F            --------            F
                      S           - NUTMEG -           S
                      L            --------            L
                      F                                F
                      S       By tERMiNAl jUNkiE       S
                      LR                              UL
                      FSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLFSLF




        
0k...... now, some of you may be wondering.... Why is this 
idiot writing about a fucking spice...... Or mabey you 
aren't... How the fuck should I know? anyway.....

NUtMEG is a spice..... that makes you trip like a 
cyber-monkey... REALLY. It is the drug of choice of monkeys. 
but that probably has something to do with it growing in the 
jungle... more on that somewhere else..... anyway....

yes, it is LEGAL.....

-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-

How to tRiP off of NUTMEG:

Obtain a jar of WHOLE nutmeg. The ground stuff is all dried 
up, and not fresh, and does not work. Whole nutmeg can be 
found in the spice section of your local grocery store. The 
best nutmeg I have seen so far is the brand they sell at 
ALBERTSONS grocery stores. It has a foil seal on the jar, and 
is the freshest I have seen. But any brand works. 

Get a coffee grinder or a cheese grater. Grind or shave up 5 
whole nutmeg for one trip. The more you take, the more you 
trip..... 5 is the usual dose. Do more after you get used to 
it. Savor the fragrent aroma........

Dump the ground nutmeg in an empty glass. Fill the glass with 
about an inch of water. (you want it to be one swallow's worth 
of water.....) Stir up the nutmeg in the water untill it is as 
well mixed as it will get. (no, it wont disolve. It looks like 
a glass full of that constipation fiber drink....) Drink it 
all. The faster the better. It doesn't taste BAD, just helluv 
strong. Be prepared to drink something else right after.... 

ok. your done. now, wait 5-7 hours. Yeah, thats one problem 
with it. it takes 5-7 hours to kick in. You may feal a little 
something not too long after drinking it, but not really. 

In 5-7 hours, you will start tripping. It is really fun. The 
trip lasts around 20 hours. The more you take the longer and 
more intense the trip. Like, 8 or so goes for almost 2 days... 
now THATS a trip.....

/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/\/

OTHER WAYS TO INGEST :

Grind the nutmeg up as above. Instead of drinking it in water, 
fill little gelitin capsules with the ground nutmeg. You can 
either buy the capsules empty, or buy something like Blue 
Green Algea pills and empty the algea out and fill with 
nutmeg. It take alot of capsules. I use an unsharpened pencil 
to pack it in the capsules. just swallow all the capsules to 
trip....

just chew up and swallow the whole nut. Works, but not as good 
as the other ways, grinding it up fine works better. And this 
tastes effing NAST-Y..... but, you shoudl experience it at 
least once..... If you can take it.....

Grind up the nuts, and wrap a little of the powder in little 
pieces of kleenex. and swallow. Just like you can do with 
crank..... It takes alot and is a bitch, but if you cant stant 
the taste..... 

Supposedly you can snort it. But I haven't tried yet. it looks 
liek you would want to grind it REALLY fine. I dunno.....


)()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()()


The actual drug in the nutmeg that fucks you up is called 
ELIMICIN. It is supposedly close in chemical structure to XTC. 
But, the trip is different. I can't really describe the trip, 
just do it and find out.....

What I usually do/feal...... I usually take 5-6 nutmeg, in a 
glass of water 7 hours before I want to trip. Then I do 
whatever. When the trip starts kicking in, I go in my room 
where it is compleatly dark. Sometimes I turn on my black 
light and look at the pretty colors.... I listen to good trip 
music, loud and with headfones for the full sterio effect. I 
lay down on my back on my bed with my eyes closed and enjoy 
the floating sensations..... But of course, as allways, the 
best thing to do when ingesting funny chemicals, is to read 
SLF trip files........You know which ones.....



What to listen to when on Elimicin :

PIGFACE's FOOK album...... FLAMING MONKEYS (Look for a file on 
how to obtain thier tape), the SMOKING BANANA PEALS album by 
the DEAD MILKMEN, and any other good sterio trip music..... if 
it's cool on ACiD and pot, it's good on elimicin......



INGEST FUNNY CHEMICALS and JOIN THE SLF! Look for our 
application, and call Chiba City Blues (916) 478-0436..







X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
