
 ***************************************************************************
 * CybermosH Presents: How To Get High Off Pizza Dough *** August 19, 1992 *
 ***************************************************************************

     Welcome to my first text phile!  Some of you may think this is rather
pointless and stupid, and hey, you would be right; but ya gotta admit, there
really ain't a WHOLE lot left to write about that hasn't been written about
before.  Who knows, this may have been written about before, too, and I just
don't know about it.  But here it is, from me to you.

     I work at a pizza shop, and when I first started working, one of the
things involved in "initiation" was to suck the "air" out of a bucket of
dough.  "Sure," I thought, "Why not?!" I poked a hole in the bag, and
inhaled.  I was surprised to get a quick little high out of this bucket of
dough (which is why they made me do it.)  I'm not sure how many pizza places
have their dough fresh made and delivered in buckets, and then covered with
plastic wrap, but that's the way it is where I work.  All ya gotta do is
bang the bucket a bit, and the dough will shrink down, and the top will fill
with "air" (not oxygen).  Just poke a hole big enough for your mouth, and
inhale deeply.  Effects: Makes ya a bit dizzy, short of breath, and your
feet get "warm".  Now, being the naturally inquisitive geniuses that we are,
we ask, "Where does the high come from?"

And the answer is: Fermentation!

Within a few hours/days of being made, the dough can tend to ferment just a
little.  When you bang the bucket, all the fermented air rises to the top.
This is not oxygen, even though it feels a bit like oxygen on the intake to
your lungs (kinda cool and refreshing).  Then you stand back, and feel a
little disoriented, and your breathing is a little more difficult.  Why?
You just inhaled a bunch of fermented air.  Now that air is inside your
lungs instead of the nice, clean oxygen you normally breathe.  Basically,
it's like being drunk for a few seconds.  More than three hits, and you can
end up really winded.

Well, that's it, gang.  I hope you've enjoyed this little presentation.
Whether this will work in smaller amounts, (bread dough from home) I am not
sure.  In any case, I am not responsible if you go and inhale 50 buckets of
dough then keel over from a heart attack.  This file is for informational
purposes only.  Yeah, right.  ;->

Call these fine boards:

Zion's Hideout 614-529-8024 Amiga 0-1/H/P/Consoles 9600+ ONLY!!
Planet 10      313-683-9722 H/P/A Etc Etc
Blitzkrieg     502-499-8933 Same thing....








X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
