
by Abbie Hoffman

Reefer Madness

If there was anything unusual in Judge Douglas Ginsburg's rapid descent, it
was probably the sight of White House conservatives scrambling to create a
loophole in the national drug hysteria that would mitigate occasional
marijuana use by a Supreme Court nominee. Never mind that President Reagan
said last year that drug users are "as dangerous to our national security as
any terrorist'; he tried dismissing Ginsburg's indiscretion as nothing more
than "youthful fancy.'

There was nothing surprising about Reagan's expedient reversal. For six
years, the only consistent thing about our national drug policy has been its
inconsistency.  Harsher penalties, urine testing, hysteria, budget cuts and
the simplistic "Just Say No!' campaign (the equivalent of telling manic
depressives to "just cheer up') have returned drug education and treatment
to the Reefer Madness era.

Since 1980 the President and Nancy Reagan, Attorney General Edwin Meese 3d
and White House drug policy advisers such as Dr.  Carlton Turner, have made
numerous rash and absurd statements about drugs. Dr.  Turner claimed that
smoking marijuana leads to AIDS (the sequence:  Pot leads to harder drugs,
which lead to sharing needles, which leads to AIDS).  Peter Bensinger,
former head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, claimed that marijuana
was harmful because it "contained dioxin.'  The dioxin, of course, came from
government spraying.  Such statements are reminiscent of the 1920s, when the
public was told that cocaine made blacks impervious to bullets.

Truth has been the first casualty in this so-called war on drugs. When
Reagan labeled drug abuse "an evil scourge' that has become the nation's
number-one social problem, during the 1986 campaign, the nation had been
whipped up into such a frenzy that polls showed the citizenry believed him. 
On October 27, 1986, Reagan got what he championed: the fifty-fifth Federal
antidrug bill in eighty years. Congress authorized $3.96 billion to attack
what Newsweek, with typical hyperbole, compared to "the plagues of medieval
times.' (That plague wiped out two-thirds of the people in Europe. According
to government statistics, in 1979 3,500 deaths were attributed to illicit
drugs.  No deaths, incidentally, were caused by marijuana.) Then, after the
elections, Reagan cut $1 billion from his own war on drugs program and, in
the harshest blow, recommended that no money be spent on drug rehabilitation
and treatment in fiscal 1988.

Like the Red Menace of the early 1950s, the current drug hysteria has led to
a loyalty oath--this time, the urine test.  Extrapolating from
margin-of-error figures supplied by manufacturers of standard drug tests (5
percent) and instances of laboratory mishandling documented by the Centers
for Disease Control (15 to 20 percent), one can easily agree with a
Northwestern University report claiming a national error rate of up to 25
percent.  That means roughly one of every four persons tested for controlled
substances could wrongly be fired, not hired or denied promotion.

But Reagan's not one to quibble about margins of error or unreasonable
biochemical searches.  Last year, when he announced the notorious drug-free
workplace edict, he targeted Federal workers as an example for all labor. 
New applicants and tenured employees were forced to submit to urine tests. 
Of course, he wants to test all workers in America, which is rapidly
occurring:  In the private sector an estimated 35 million people were
screened this year and the White House hopes to see 90 million being tested
by 1990.

It is time to rethink a complex problem like drug abuse and disregard the
simplistic nonsense of the Reagan antidrug campaign, which has ignored
scientific evidence and overridden fundamental values of privacy and due
process.



X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
