                    TOAD LICKING THE LATEST HIGH
         Amphibians produce slime that causes hallucinations

Licking toads will not give you warts or produce a fairy prince,
but it might get you high. It isn't exactly an epidemic, but the
Drug Enforcement Administration says toad licking is the latest way
to hallucinate. "It sounds like a fairy tale gone wrong, doesn't
it?" said Robert K. Sager, chief of the DEA's laboratory in San
Francisco. "Now, I don't think this is going to be a great problem
because people don't go around licking toads as a habit." The
culprit: the Cane toad. "They're beautiful toads," Sager Said.
"People like them." The Cane toad, which can grow to the size of a
dinner plate, produces a toxin called bufotenine, which the toad
secretes to ward off predators. When licked raw. or cooked, the
toxin acts as a hallucinogen. In the Southwest recently, several
dogs have died after eating Cane toads, and the DEA has had
bufotenine turn up at its research labs from time to time after
drug arrests. In Washoe County, the prospect of gonzo toad lickers
in our midst produced a few chuckles in the offices of the county's
Consolidated Narcotics Unit.

"We're not aware of any toad-licking problems," said Sparks police
Lt. Tim Gonyo, who heads the unit. "As far as we're aware of,
toad-licking has not hit Washoe County." Local pet store operators
reacted with astonishment. "That's pretty gross," said Michele
Robinette, manager of Reno's Pets Unlimited. "That's a new one, and
we've heard a lot of strange things around here." Robinette said
she knew of no area pet stores that peddle the mind-altering
amphibian. The green and red toads produce the same toxin found in
amanita mushrooms, cohoba seeds and other plants. Indians in South
America have used the toxin for its hallucinogenic qualities for
years in religious ceremonies, and some tribes have used it in
blowguns to kill dinner. Bufotenine is considered a controlled,
dangerous substance and is therefore illegal.

However, it is not against the law to own a Cane toad. a favorite
of aquarium afficionados. "If you had a toad. we would have to
prove you were licking it on purpose, or you had given it to
someone to lick on purpose," Sager explained. The Cane toad has
come into some renown in Australia. where four people died last
year after partaking of its marbled flesh. (Depending on the size
of the toad and the concentrations of toxin consumed. bufotenine
can be fatal). The toad was imported to Australia from Hawaii in
1935 to kill the Greyback beetle, which was destroying sugar-can@
in Queensland. The toad adapted beautifully, multiplied in the
millions and ate everything - except for the beetle. Last fall,
officials in Brisbane, Australia's third-largest city, announced an
elaborate plan to eradicate the poisonous toads, which today pose a
major threat to the continent's fauna and wildlife. In recent
years, toad licking has become popular in the Australian outback,
prompting Queensland's government to classify the toad slime as an
illegal substance under its Drug Misuse Act. "That's how this whole
cycle started - a lack of dope in the Australian outback," Sager
said. "There, they are killing the toads, drying the skins and
making tea. Yummy, huh?"






Okay, so I'm not sure if the above is true.  I'm passing it on
because with the way that we operate as a national group, it would
not be inconceivable.  Several people have told me that it is for
real.........G O O D    L O R D........

  Distributed in part by:

   Skeleton Crue  415-376-8060  located out of Moraga, California.
	 !!Get on the band wagon before it RUNS YOU DOWN!!
The very LAST bastion of Abusive Thought in all of the Suburbian West Coast...
			      (CH&AOS)
 
 
 


X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
 Another file downloaded from:                     The NIRVANAnet(tm) Seven

 & the Temple of the Screaming Electron   Taipan Enigma        510/935-5845
 Burn This Flag                           Zardoz               408/363-9766
 realitycheck                             Poindexter Fortran   510/527-1662
 Lies Unlimited                           Mick Freen           801/278-2699
 The New Dork Sublime                     Biffnix              415/864-DORK
 The Shrine                               Rif Raf              206/794-6674
 Planet Mirth                             Simon Jester         510/786-6560

                          "Raw Data for Raw Nerves"
X-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-=-X
