*--*  03-16-92  -  12:52:56  *--*


Excerpt from:

"Smart Drugs & Nutrients: How to improve your memory an increase intelligence
using the latest discoveries in neuroscience."

By Ward Dean, MD. and John Morgenthaler

B&J Publications, Santa Cruz, CA

                       ====================
                       VASOPRESSIN (Diapid)
                       ====================

Vasopressin anti-diuretic hormone is a hormone secreted by the posterior
portion of the pituitary gland. It is approved for treatment of diabetes
insipidus because it prevents the frequent urination that occurs in this
disease. Vasopressin has also been used to treat memory deficits due to
aging, senile dementia. Alzheimer's disease, Korsakoff's Syndrome and
amnesia. It improves attention, concentration, memory retention, and recall
(both short-term and long-term). Vasopressin is necessary for imprinting new
More<n,Y,=>           information in your memory.

Cocaine, LSD, amphetamines, Ritalin, and Cylert (pemoline) cause your
pituitary gland to release natural vasopressin at a faster rate. Frequent use
of these drugs can cause depleted levels of vasopressin with resultant
slowness and dopiness. A shiff of vasopressin can transform stimulant burnout
experience in about 10 seconds, because it is rapidly absorbed by the nasal
mucosa, and immediately replaces the vasopressin that has been depleted.

Conversely, marijuana and alcohol supress the release of vasopressin. A whiff
of vasopressin when using these drugs will compensate for much of the
dopiness caused by them.

Vasopressin is very useful when learning large amounts of new information..
It can increase your ability to memorize and recall.

Many people have very strong and positive reactions to vasopressin. We
include a number of testimonials in appendix D.

PRECAUTIONS: Vasopressin occasionally produces the following side effects;
nasal congestion, runny nose, itch or irritation of the nasal passages,
abdominal cramps, headache, and increased bowel movements. Vasopressin has
More<n,Y,=>           not been proven to be safe for use during pregnancy. It should also be used
cautiously in cases of hypertension or epilepsy.

DOSAGE: Vasopressin usually comes in a nasal spray bottle. Most studies
showing memory improvement have been done with a dose of 12 to 16 USP per
day, or about two whiffs three or four times per day. Vasopressin produces a
noticeable effect within seconds.

SOURCES: Vasopressin is available in the USA. You can buy it with a doctors
prescription. Again, keep in mind that most physicians may not be familiar
with the uses we discuss here. It can also be purchased over the counter in
Mexico or by mail order from the sources listed in appendix A.

Vasopressin (also called antidiuretic hormone) coimes in three forms:
lysine-vasopressin (Diapid, LVP, Lypressin, Postacton, Synpressin),
l-desamino-8-D-arginine (Adiruetin, SD, DAV Ritter, DDAVP, Desmopressin,
Desmospray, Minirin), and arginine vasopressin (argipressin, AVP,
rinder-vasopressin). All forms have very similar or identical effects.

REFERENCES:

 De Wied, D., et al. "Vasopressin and Memory Consolidation"
More<n,Y,=>            _Perspectives in Brain Research_.
 New York: Elsevier Scientific Publishing, 1975

 Gold, P.W., et al. "Effects of l-Desamino-8-Arginine Vasopressin on
 Behavior and Cognition in Primary Affective Disorders."
 The Lancet. November 10,1979, pp 992-94

 Laczi, F., et al. "Effects of Lysine Vasopressin and
 l-Desamino-8-Arginine-Vasopressin on Memory in Healthy Individuals and
 Diabetes Insipidus Patients."
 Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1982, Vol. 7, No. 2. pp 185-92

 Legros, J.J. et al. "Influence of Vasopressin on Learning and Memory"
 The Lancet. January 7, 1978 pp 41-42

 Oliveros J.C., et al. "Vasopressin in Amnesia."
 The Lancet. January 7. 1978 pp 42

 Pearson, D., Shaw, S. "Life Extension, a Practical Scientific Approach."
 New York: Warner Books, 1982

 Pelton, R., Pelton T.C., "Mind Food and Smart Pills."
More<n,Y,=>            New York: Doubleday, 1989

------------

Vasopressin:

"The most immediate result form using Vasopressin is the increased clarity
and alertness. I can be logical without the usual speediness associated with
caffeine use. After five minutes I've noticed that I'm busily accomplishing
tasks that I'd been putting off for a week. The duration is about two hours
for the energetic feelings. Overall, I feel my short-term memory recall
improving over the past two weeks of using Vasopressin. It seems that the
longer I use it, the more I can rely on my mind to be a portable note pad"
-DB

"Being a student is less stressful now that I have Vasopressin to use. I can
count on my mind being clear enough to formulate test answers, even if I feel
tired or foggy-headed." -DB

"During my final year as an undergraduate, I decided to changes majors from
psychology to mathematics. I was also running out of money and I knew  I had
to finish in one year and then get a job. I started using a combination of
More<n,Y,=>           Hydergine, vasopressin, pemoline, and agood vitamin formula with large
amounts of choline. This particular combination improved my concentration
enormously. I flew through that year taking a full load of upper level
mathematics courses each semester. Not only did I complete the major in the
allotted time, but my grades were better than I was used to. I landed a job
in Silicon Valley immediately after graduation. In other words, everything
went perfectly according to plan and I really don't think I could have done
it without smart drugs." -SR

============================================================================
The Guild BBS [FTS] (310)641/6909 (1:5150/20)

Enter item#, Scan, Quit, ?=Menu

DrugInfo : YYYYYY
